IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS, VOL. 6, NO. 2, APRIL 2021

951

Predictive Uncertainty Estimation Using Deep
Learning for Soft Robot Multimodal Sensing
Ze Yang Ding , Junn Yong Loo, Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Vishnu Monn Baskaran ,
Surya Girinatha Nurzaman , Member, IEEE, and Chee Pin Tan , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—The mechanical compliance of soft robots comes at a
cost of higher uncertainty in their sensing and perception, which
deteriorates the accuracy of predictive models. Predictive uncertainty, which expresses the confidence behind model predictions,
is necessary to compensate for the loss of accuracy in soft robot
perceptive models. Nevertheless, developing a general framework
to capture uncertainties is further challenged by the complex dynamics of soft robots and the difficulties in sensorizing them. In this
work, we present a predictive uncertainty estimation framework
based on deep learning for soft robot multimodal sensing. We show
that the framework can learn to quantify uncertainty and thus is
able to express the confidence associated with the predictions during inference. Being data-driven, it is scalable to different types of
soft robots and sensor modalities. We demonstrate the framework
on a complex multimodal sensing task where a single flex sensor
is used to predict the full-body configuration of a soft actuator, as
well as the magnitude and location of external contact force. We
also discuss how predictive uncertainties are critical to achieve safe
learning and model interpretability in soft robotics.
Index Terms—Modeling, control, learning for soft robots, deep
learning methods.

I. INTRODUCTION
OFT robots [1] offer incredible mechanical compliance
and flexibility, making them highly adaptable for operations such as minimally invasive surgery [2] or search and rescue [3]. However, the compliant nature comes at a cost of higher
uncertainty in their behavior as they can continuously alter
their configurations through planned or unplanned deformation
modes [4]. Consequently, these uncertain and uncharacteristic
behaviors pose a fundamental challenge in achieving accurate
sensing and perception in soft robots [5].

S

Manuscript received September 2, 2020; accepted January 11, 2021. Date
of publication February 1, 2021; date of current version February 15, 2021.
This letter was recommended for publication by Associate Editor S. Coros
and Editor C. Laschi upon evaluation of the reviewers’ comments. This work
was supported by the Ministry of Higher Education Malaysia under Grant
FRGS/1/2017/ICT02/MUSM/03/3. (Corresponding authors: Surya Girinatha
Nurzaman; Chee Pin Tan.)
Ze Yang Ding, Junn Yong Loo, Surya Girinatha Nurzaman, and Chee Pin
Tan are with the School of Engineering and Advanced Engineering Platform, Monash University Malaysia, Selangor 47500, Malaysia (e-mail:
ze.ding@monash.edu; junn.loo@monash.edu; surya.nurzaman@monash.edu;
tan.chee.pin@monash.edu).
Vishnu Monn Baskaran is with the School of Information Technology, Monash University Malaysia, Selangor 47500, Malaysia (e-mail:
vishnu.monn@monash.edu).
This article has supplementary downloadable material available at https://doi.
org/10.1109/LRA.2021.3056066, provided by the authors.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LRA.2021.3056066

In general, uncertainties can be aleatoric or epistemic [6].
Aleatoric uncertainty is inherent in the physical phenomenon
itself and cannot be reduced, such as the intrinsic noise and
hysteresis of soft sensors. On the other hand, epistemic uncertainty arises due to practical limitations such as simplifying
constant-curvature assumption or unmodeled manipulator dynamics. Therefore, modeling of soft robots must be accompanied
by a systematic analysis of uncertainty to compensate for the potential loss in accuracy. Currently, uncertainty modeling is still in
its nascence in soft robotics. In [7], a robust controller is designed
to compensate for the mismatched uncertainty terms between an
exact and a nominal model. For soft robotic state estimation [8],
uncertainties from process and measurement noise are accounted
for using Kalman filters. In [9], grasping algorithms are devised
for a soft manipulator to handle the positioning and object pose
uncertainty to achieve repeatable grasps. Though these works
aim to produce the best predictions/actions in the presence of
uncertainties, they do not consider uncertainties associated with
the predictions (i.e. predictive uncertainties).
As predictive models can never be completely accurate, estimating the predictive uncertainty [10]–[12] is crucial to express
the confidence behind the prediction. For example, predicting
the shape of a soft medical robot near sensitive tissues during
operation should be accompanied with a measure of uncertainty,
so that surgeons can take over when uncertainty is high [13].
Thus, predictive uncertainty provides a safe and interpretable
means for users to trust and manage the system. To the best of
our knowledge, only [14] considers predictive uncertainty in soft
robots, where interval arithmetic is used to represent the input
and parameter uncertainty as interval variables, which propagate
through the model to form a bounded interval for the output pose
estimation. However, the method relies on manual conservative
selection of input and parameter intervals to guarantee that all
uncertainties are enclosed, which may result in overestimation
of the predictive intervals. In addition, this analytical approach
may not be easily scalable, especially when more complex robot
designs are considered or when multimodal sensing is required.
To formulate a predictive uncertainty estimation framework,
other fundamental challenges in soft robot perception must not
be overlooked. For one, it is known that the design of soft robots
is very diverse, depending on their applications. Therefore, an
ideal framework must be scalable to various designs as well
as the modalities and resolution of different soft sensors. A
compelling solution is to adopt data-driven approaches such as
deep learning which are scalable with sufficient data. Recently,

2377-3766 © 2021 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Soongsil University. Downloaded on March 05,2026 at 11:59:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

952

IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS, VOL. 6, NO. 2, APRIL 2021

neural networks (NNs) have proven to be very effective in
soft robot perception, demonstrating high fidelity in predicting
various parameters such as position [15], external pressure [16]
and force [17]. Nevertheless, these works do not consider incorporating predictive uncertainty in their empirical frameworks.
Without any measure of predictive uncertainties, the predictions
can only be assumed to be accurate and taken blindly, which is
risky for safety-critical applications. Therefore, as a fundamental
step toward safe learning with deep NNs, predictive uncertainty
estimation is essential for learning-based methods to be safely
integrated into soft robotic systems [18].
Apart from this, another fundamental issue that must not be
neglected in soft robot perception is to develop an efficient
multimodal sensing framework, which can ideally sense many
physical parameters using a minimal number of sensors. This is
motivated by the inherent difficulties in sensorizing soft robots,
because carelessly integrating multiple sensors may compromise their inherent softness [19]. Recent works address this issue
via intrinsic sensing [20], [21], which infers external stimuli
such as contact forces based on configuration-level information
transmitted along the soft bodies. For instance, proprioceptive
flex sensors are used to predict the position or bending angle
of a soft actuator as well as its external contact force [22],
[23], thus achieving multimodality with minimal sensors. Nevertheless, these works confine sensing only at the tip of the
soft actuator, which is insufficient to capture the dynamics of
the whole robot. More importantly, they also do not consider
predictive uncertainty estimation, which is imperative to express
the uncertainty introduced by inferring high-dimensional state
space from minimal sensory feedback.
In this work, we address these interwoven challenges by
presenting a predictive uncertainty estimation framework based
on deep learning for soft robot multimodal sensing. Our contributions are outlined as follows:
1) We formulate a probabilistic framework that learns to
capture the aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty from data.
We show that our framework can express the confidence
associated with the predictions during real-time inference
and that it outperforms previous approaches that do not
consider predictive uncertainty.
2) We design our framework via deep learning such that it is
readily scalable to multimodal sensing tasks represented
by multidimensional sensory timeseries. We demonstrate
the framework on a soft pneumatic actuator by predicting
its configuration from base to tip, as well as the magnitude
and location of external contact force, thus achieving multimodality using only a single embedded sensor (Fig. 1).
3) We show that the predictive uncertainties are wellcalibrated [24] and not deceived by out-of-distribution
data [25], and we discuss how these properties can facilitate safe learning and model interpretability which are
currently unexplored in soft robotics.
II. METHODOLOGY
A. Problem Formulation
As the data represents a continuous stream of sensory information, we can treat the problem as a time sequence prediction

Fig. 1. Our soft robot is embedded with a single flex sensor to predict its
position (markers) as well as the magnitude and location of external contact
force. Predictions may be inaccurate due to model error or sensor noise, and
thus a measure of predictive uncertainty achieved in this work can convey
the confidence of the prediction at every instance. The achieved full-body
multimodal sensing is also beneficial because (i) several markers can capture
the dynamics of robot more accurately and (ii) external contact force can be
anywhere along the body instead of just at the tip.

task and utilize recurrent neural network (RNN) [22]. Therefore,
the high level summary of the problem we are addressing is
supervised multivariate regression with RNN. Given a timeseries
dataset D = {xt , y t }Tt=1 , where T is the length of the series,
x ∈ Ru is the input and y ∈ Rr is the output, we wish to learn
a mapping y = f (x, h). The vector h represents the feature
vector extracted from past inputs, which is also known as the cell
memory in RNNs. Learning f with a RNN is straightforward:
choose a suitable recurrent architecture with input size u and
output size r, then train the weights using mean squared error
(MSE) loss. However, our main goal is to incorporate predictive
uncertainty into the model, thus modifications have to be made
to the architecture and the loss function.
B. Aleatoric (Statistical) Uncertainty
Due to the inherent noise present in the data (sensor measurements), we do not treat the prediction as a point estimate, but as a
range of probable values. Thus, instead of learning f (x, h), we
look at it as a probability distribution p(y|x, h), from which the
predictive uncertainty can be quantified. To learn p, we modify
the output layer of the RNN to produce the parameters of the
distribution, then update the weights via maximum likelihood.
A common choice in previous works [11], [12] is the heteroscedastic Gaussian distribution, p(y|x) = N (μ(x), σ 2 (x)),
due to its simple (negative log) likelihood loss: LNLL (θ) =
(y−μθ (x))2
1
2
+ const. Deep learning is adopted by
2 log σθ (x) +
2σθ2 (x)
parameterizing both the mean and variance with deep NNs.
In this work, we propose an extension to this loss in order to
better accommodate typical robotic sensory dataset in the form
of multidimensional timeseries. Let j be the component index
for the output vector y of arbitrary dimension (r ≥ 1), we scale
the RNN by choosing an output size of 2r, such that every output
pair corresponds to the Gaussian mean and variance of the j th
component of y. Therefore, each component is essentially a
separate Gaussian distribution sharing the same parameters θ.
The final loss is obtained by summing up the contributions across
individual components and timesteps. The overall training loss

Authorized licensed use limited to: Soongsil University. Downloaded on March 05,2026 at 11:59:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DING et al.: PREDICTIVE UNCERTAINTY ESTIMATION USING DEEP LEARNING FOR SOFT ROBOT MULTIMODAL SENSING

function (NLL+) is
T

LNLL+ (θ) =

r

1 
(ytj − μtj )2
stj +
2 t=1 j=1
estj

(1)

where μt =: μθ (xt , ht ) and st =: log σθ2 (xt , ht ) are the outputs of the RNN (log σ 2 instead of σ 2 to enforce positive
variance), representing the vectors of mean prediction and log
predictive variance of the distribution respectively. This proposed approach has several advantages: i) The formulation
is easy to implement as it assumes that covariances between
different output components are zero, thus matrix inversion is
not required. (ii) For any arbitrary r, only a single RNN (with
enough capacity) is needed instead of r separate RNNs. (iii) As
the variance is a function of the input and is also specific to every
output component, it provides more generality as the model can
learn to represent uncertainty under different input conditions
and for different physical output parameters. In practice, if the
timeseries data is very long (large T ) then it should be broken
down into batches of smaller timesteps to speed up convergence.
C. Epistemic (Model) Uncertainty
Due to stochastic gradient descent, two NNs trained using
the same data, architecture and loss function can have different
predictions for the same input, as they may achieve different
(local) minima. Therefore, there is uncertainty in the weights
of the network which contributes to predictive uncertainty.
To capture this, previous works in computer vision propose
Bayesian approximation through Monte Carlo dropout [10],
[11]. However, this method typically requires tens to hundreds
of NN forward passes, which is computationally expensive
for real-time applications. An alternative is to adopt ensemble
learning [12] which combines multiple models to obtain better
predictive performance. In our experiments, we train M RNNs
independently using Eq. (1) with the same dataset. As a result, we
have M predicted Gaussians for each output component at every
timestep, which we combine using a mixture model framework.
Let φm denote the mixture weights of the distributions where
m = 1, 2, . . . , M , we can calculate the mean and variance of the
ensemble at every timestep as
μ t∗ =
σ 2t∗ =

M

m=1
M

m=1

φ m μ tm

(2)

φm (σ 2tm + μ2tm ) − μ2t∗ .

(3)

By taking the weighted average of the models as such, the
predictive variance incorporates the uncertainty in the model
weights. Furthermore, the predictive mean becomes more robust
compared to non-ensemble approaches. In our experiments, we
2
for all timesteps are not suffind that the individual μm and σm
ficiently different across m to induce a multimodal distribution,
and thus we make the assumption that the mixture distribution is
also Gaussian with mean μ∗ and variance σ∗2 , in order to easily
compute the confidence interval of the predictions.

953

It is crucial that the individual models are diverse enough such
that the ensemble is not trivial (i.e. all models are the same in
the ensemble). Therefore, we further propose a simple strategy
(Ensemble+) to enhance model diversity in the ensemble in
addition to stochastic gradient descent. In our experiments, we
simply alter certain hyperparameters, such as number of neurons
or batch size, around the optimal values across different models.
Only a small variation is implemented as NNs are sensitive to
hyperparameters settings. This strategy de-correlates individual models in the ensemble while maintaining their accuracy.
Substantial architectural change is not recommended as certain
architectures may not be appropriate which could reduce the
overall predictive accuracy.
III. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
A. Robot Setup & Data Collection
We experimentally validate our approach on a soft pneumatic
actuator (SPA) [8], [23] with a single resistive flex sensor embedded along its body. To investigate the full-body dynamics
of the SPA, we attach eight reflective markers (plus one at
the very top as reference) along its constraint layer which are
continuously tracked by our motion capture system. We intend to
predict (i) the relative x- and y-coordinates of all eight markers
and (ii) the magnitude and location of external contact force,
using only limited sensory feedback. We measure the contact
force magnitude with a compression load cell placed in front
of the SPA. Using a robotic arm, we move the SPA randomly
along the y-axis, while keeping the position of the load cell
(ycell ) fixed, and thus the force location can be easily obtained as
ycell − yref . Fig. 2 shows the experimental setup of the robot
for data collection. In addition to flex sensor feedback, we
also measure the pressure supplied to the SPA and use this
information as additional input to our model. The pressure sensor
used for measurement is external to the SPA and does not affect
its dynamics.
We actuate the SPA with a series of randomly determined
pressure levels within a predetermined pressure range. Between
every change in the pressure level, we introduce a random delay
of 1 to 5 seconds to capture both the transient and steady state
response of the SPA. For contact force, we instruct the robotic
arm to move the SPA to an arbitrary location along the y-axis,
such that the contact can be anywhere from the base to the tip.
We change the contact location every 10 to 30 seconds, which is
also determined randomly. All measurements are sampled using
MATLAB at 10 Hz (frequency is limited by our data acquisition
method). A total of 180 minutes of data is collected and split
according to a 80–20 ratio for training (144 mins) and testing
(36 mins) data. No shuffling is done as we intend to model the
data as a timeseries.
B. RNN Architecture and Training
We first search for suitable hyperparameters using a validation
set (20% of training set), then train the final model using the best
hyperparameters on the whole training set. In our experiments,
we use long short-term memory (LSTM) networks that are

Authorized licensed use limited to: Soongsil University. Downloaded on March 05,2026 at 11:59:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

954

IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS, VOL. 6, NO. 2, APRIL 2021

TABLE I
MODEL COMPARISON USING RMSE AND NLL SCORES

Fig. 2. (a) Overview of experimental setup. The robotic arm holds the SPA
and moves it randomly along an axis (red arrows) to introduce external contact at
different location along the body. (b) Snapshots of the SPA during data collection.
A high number of reflective markers are used to accurately describe the configuration, because the full-body shape under contact can be very complex, which
cannot be sufficiently captured by either using only a tip marker or assuming
uniform bending.

3-layer deep with a hidden size of 128 each and a dropout
probability of 0.5. For the output layer, we connect a dense
layer to the last layer of the recurrent network to map the
temporal features to the outputs. The training data are rescaled
to the range of [−1,1] and reorganized into batches of 32 with
a sequence length (or timestep) of 100. Shuffling is only done
at the batch-level (not the sequence-level) to retain the temporal
information. We train all networks for a total of 100 epochs
using the Adam optimizer, with an initial learning rate of 0.007
subjected to cosine decay every epoch down to a minimum of
10−6 . To enhance the model diversity for ensemble learning,
we vary the “nominal” value of batch size (32) and hidden
size (128) to be within [25,35] and [120140] respectively. Since
the networks are trained independently, the mixture weights are
chosen to be uniform, i.e. φm = 1/M . We use M = 10 in our
experiment which is acceptable in terms of performance and
computational time. Fig. 3 provides an illustration of the overall
framework.
IV. RESULTS & DISCUSSION
A. Predictive Performance & Comparison
This section compares the multimodal sensing predictive
results of our model against other approaches. We choose the
baseline as a LSTM trained with MSE loss, which is the prevalent
approach in previous data-driven methods that do not consider
predictive uncertainty. We also compare against the state-ofthe-art in predictive uncertainty estimation, which is based on

Monte-Carlo (MC) dropout sampling [10], [11]. Because there
are no ground truths for variances, the NLL loss is used to evaluate the quality of the uncertainties [12]. Table I summarizes the
results of the comparison. We observe that our model achieves
the lowest NLL score compared to other models, indicating that
our predictive uncertainties are much more meaningful when
interpreted as a Gaussian distribution. In addition, our model
also achieves the lowest RMSE, which is counter-intuitive as we
would expect the baseline or [10] to perform better, since they
are explicitly trained to minimize the MSE. We reason that this
is because the output ground truths are noisy, thus minimizing
MSE alone has inadvertently overfit to part of the noise. With
the NLL loss function, higher loss induced by noisy labels can
be compensated when the model learns to predict larger σ 2 .
Hence, by allowing the networks to predict uncertainty, they
become more robust to noisy sensory labels.
MC dropout methods require a high number of samples for
accurate approximation of the uncertainty [10], which could be
computationally prohibitive for real-time inferences. With the
ensemble method, we show in Fig. 4 that M does not need to
be very large in order to be accurate. Although there is a M×
increase of computation in terms of training the models, this is
done offline and does not burden the real-time deployment.
B. Validation and Visualization
For validation, we plot the ground truth against the prediction
and predictive uncertainty using our model, as shown in Fig. 5.
The model is able to track the position of the markers very well,
as shown in the first two line plots. Thus, the pressure and flex
information are very effective in describing the proprioceptive
properties of the soft robot. The prediction of force magnitude
and location are noticeably less accurate compared to the markers’ coordinates. This is not surprising as the force information
has no intuitive connection to the inputs, and therefore the mapping could be more intricate. Nevertheless, the loss in accuracy is
accompanied by larger predictive uncertainties, which indicates
that the model is able to acknowledge its weaker aspect instead
of being overconfident.
To visualize the outcomes of full-body multimodal sensing
of the SPA, Fig. 6 illustrates the prediction of the relative
coordinates of all eight markers together with the magnitude and
location of external contact force, augmented with the prediction
uncertainty. Despite the high number of possible configuration
states from 8 markers, and that only one embedded sensor is
used, the result shows that our model is able to predict the
proprioceptive information very well under most conditions.
For external force information, we observe that in general the
predictions are less accurate when actuation pressure is lower,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Soongsil University. Downloaded on March 05,2026 at 11:59:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DING et al.: PREDICTIVE UNCERTAINTY ESTIMATION USING DEEP LEARNING FOR SOFT ROBOT MULTIMODAL SENSING

955

Fig. 3. Overview of the multimodal sensing framework with predictive uncertainty. At every timestep t, the RNN receives a 2-dimensional input vector (pressure
and flex) and predicts the mean and log variance of 18 quantities (force magnitude, force location, x- and y-coordinates of 8 markers), which is a 36-dimensional
output vector. An ensemble of M networks are used to obtain the best predictions and their uncertainties during inference.

Fig. 4. Model performance improves as M increases, but diminishes for larger
M . We choose M = 10 in our experiments which is reasonable in terms of
performance and computational training time.

and vice versa. During low pressurization, the robot does not
deform significantly which implies that the flex sensor feedback
is similar, regardless of the location of the fixed contact. As a
result, the observability in these situations is diminished and thus
it is difficult for the model to identify the exact location of the
contact. However, the predictive variances of the magnitude and
location of the force are able to reflect the higher uncertainty
as shown by the larger predictive gap. As the actuation pressure
increases, the robot’s deformation, and hence the flex sensor
feedback, are accentuated thus the predictions are more accurate
with lower uncertainties.
C. Reliability of Uncertainty Estimates
A larger predictive bound is required to ensure a comprehensive enclosure of all possible predictions [14]. However,
larger boundaries would make the uncertainty quantification less
meaningful. Instead, our model expresses predictive uncertainty
in a probabilistic manner, and thus the widths of the output
intervals depend on the level of confidence. Nonetheless, the

Fig. 5. Plots of ground truth vs predictions over 200 seconds, for the x- and
y-coordinates of the tip (8th) marker, the force magnitude and the force location.
Force magnitude is shown in grams because values in Newton are very small.
Plots for remaining markers are similar to the tip marker and are not shown for
brevity (can be generated with the accompanying code).

confidence interval must be correctly calibrated in order to be
interpretable, i.e. a γ% confidence interval must enclose the
observations γ% of the time. To demonstrate this in a regression setting, we construct a γ% confidence interval based on
a Gaussian distribution given the predicted mean μ and the
variance σ 2 , record whether the ground truth falls within this
interval, and repeat the process for all of the test data. If the
observed percentage is close to γ, the model is considered to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Soongsil University. Downloaded on March 05,2026 at 11:59:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

956

IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS, VOL. 6, NO. 2, APRIL 2021

Fig. 6. 2D visualization of the predictions and their uncertainties, based on the soft actuator setup, to observe the response of the predictions and the predictive
uncertainties under different conditions. A video showing the real-time performance is shown in the supplementary material.

predictive uncertainty for the same sequence of input between
our proposed and the benchmark models. [10] frequently fails
to capture the ground truth because its confidence interval is
too narrow, whereas [11]’s interval is overly wide. In essence,
our framework is able to facilitate the calculation of meaningful
confidence intervals and thus provide higher interpretability for
users to manage the robotic system.
D. Detection of Out-of-Distribution Data

Fig. 7. (a) Reliability diagram showing that the proposed model is wellcalibrated compared to the the others which are overconfident. The dotted line
indicates perfect calibration. (b) Plots of the ground truth versus the prediction
of marker’s position ±2σ to illustrate that [10] is overconfident whereas [11] is
under-confident.

be well-calibrated. We do this for γ = 0 to 100 and plot the
resulting curve (reliability diagram) in Fig. 7(a).
Our model is well-calibrated as it is very close to the identity
line. On the other hand, the other two models either over or
under-estimate the predictive variance. For example, only 20%
of test data are observed within a 60% confidence interval
for [10], which indicates that it is severely overconfident with
its predictions. To illustrate this issue, Fig. 7(b) compares the

Test data which are sufficiently different from training data
are described as out-of-distribution (OOD). Ideally, we want
a model to express larger uncertainty when OOD data are
encountered, because it should not be confident with data that
do not come from the same distribution. In our experiments,
we simulate OOD data as input values that are outside of the
normalized range of training data, i.e. [−1, 1]. To achieve this,
a negative and positive drift signal are added to the pressure and
flex measurements respectively for 30 seconds, clipped at −1.5
and 1.5. We investigate the resulting predictive uncertainty by
averaging the predictive variance across the output variables and
plot it against time, as shown in Fig. 8.
When the drift happens, the variance of our model increases
(largest compared to others), indicating that it is highly uncertain
about its point predictions. Since it is difficult to extrapolate to
completely unseen region, our model can at least compensate
this by expressing a larger predictive uncertainty to identify the
unknowns, after which precautionary steps can be taken to avoid
undesirable consequences. This is an instance of safe learning
from data which facilitates model trustworthiness with users.
However, the detection is insignificant from t = 30 to t = 40,
although the drift has already occurred. We find that the inputs
within this time frame are still within the training range and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Soongsil University. Downloaded on March 05,2026 at 11:59:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DING et al.: PREDICTIVE UNCERTAINTY ESTIMATION USING DEEP LEARNING FOR SOFT ROBOT MULTIMODAL SENSING

957

REFERENCES

Fig. 8. Out-of-distribution detection. To simulate sensor drift, drift signals are
added to the inputs for over 30 seconds, indicated by the shaded region. Our
model expresses high uncertainty when the data becomes sufficiently different
from the training data.

thus the model does not view them as sufficiently different.
Therefore, there is still room for improvement in this aspect
because distributional shift of data can happen without drifting
outside of the training range.
V. CONCLUSION
In this letter, we propose a general predictive uncertainty
estimation framework based on deep learning for multimodal
sensing in soft robots. Our model provides accurate predictions
and representations of predictive uncertainties in real-time, and
outperforms those that do not estimate predictive uncertainty,
such as MSE-trained networks. Although the number of output
variables far exceeds that of available input measurements,
our approach achieves efficient multimodality which could be
analytically demanding for non-empirical approaches.
Predictive uncertainty can establish trustworthiness in humanrobot interactions as calibrated uncertainty estimates are able to
facilitate model interpretability. Moreover, the model is able to
identify what it knows and does not know through the response
of the predictive intervals, which is crucial in safety-critical
operations. Therefore, predictive uncertainty estimation is a fundamental step towards model interpretability and safe learning
in artificial intelligence for users to effectively trust and manage
soft robotic systems.
Currently, our robotic platform is a planar bending actuator
that experiences a single contact force, and therefore the trained
model is specific to this particular setup. For other types of soft
robots with more complex deformation modes and/or multiple
contact points, the proposed method is generalizable but the
experimental setup may need to be scaled up by introducing
additional training scenarios or embedding more sensors. A
current limitation of this work is that the model would lose
accuracy if the soft robotic system experiences physical changes,
such as material stiffening or wear and tear. Thus, a potential
future endeavor is to investigate how predictive uncertainty can
detect slow distributional shift and facilitate online learning.

[1] S. G. Nurzaman, F. Iida, L. Margheri, and C. Laschi, “Soft robotics on the
move: Scientific networks, activities, and future challenges,” Soft Robot.,
vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 154–158, 2014.
[2] M. Cianchetti et al., “Soft robotics technologies to address shortcomings in
today’s minimally invasive surgery: The stiff-flop approach,” Soft Robot.,
vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 122–131, 2014.
[3] M. T. Tolley et al., “A resilient, untethered soft robot,” Soft Robot., vol. 1,
no. 3, pp. 213–223, 2014.
[4] B. Shih et al., “Electronic skins and machine learning for intelligent soft
robots,” Sci. Robot., vol. 5, no. 41, p. eaaz 9239, 2020.
[5] H. Wang, M. Totaro, and L. Beccai, “Toward perceptive soft robots:
Progress and challenges,” Adv. Sci., vol. 5, no. 9, p. 1800541, 2018.
[6] A. Der Kiureghian and O. Ditlevsen, “Aleatory or epistemic? does it
matter?,” Structural Safety, vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 105–112, 2009.
[7] G. Zheng, “Control of a silicone soft tripod robot via uncertainty compensation,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 2801–2807, Apr. 2020.
[8] J. Y. Loo, K. C. Kong, C. P. Tan, and S. G. Nurzaman, “Non-Linear system
identification and state estimation in a pneumatic based soft continuum
robot,” in Proc. Conf. Control Technol. Appl. IEEE, 2019, pp. 39–46.
[9] B. S. Homberg, R. K. Katzschmann, M. R. Dogar, and D. Rus, “Robust
proprioceptive grasping with a soft robot hand,” Auton. Robot., vol. 43,
no. 3, pp. 681–696, 2019.
[10] Y. Gal and Z. Ghahramani, “Dropout as a bayesian approximation: Representing model uncertainty in deep learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
Learn., 2016, pp. 1050–1059.
[11] A. Kendall and Y. Gal, “What uncertainties do we need in bayesian deep
learning for computer vision?,” in Proc. Conf. Neural Infor. Process. Syst.,
2017, pp. 5574–5584.
[12] B. Lakshminarayanan, A. Pritzel, and C. Blundell, “Simple and scalable
predictive uncertainty estimation using deep ensembles,” in Proc. Conf.
Neural Infor. Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 6402–6413.
[13] P. L. Anderson, A. W. Mahoney, and R. J. Webster, “Continuum reconfigurable parallel robots for surgery: Shape sensing and state estimation
with uncertainty,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 1617–1624,
Jul. 2017.
[14] N. Tan, X. Gu, and H. Ren, “Pose characterization and analysis of soft continuum robots with modeling uncertainties based on interval arithmetic,”
IEEE Trans. Automat. Sci. Eng., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 570–584, Apr. 2019.
[15] R. L. Truby, C. Della Santina, and D. Rus, “Distributed proprioception
of 3 d configuration in soft, sensorized robots via deep learning,” IEEE
Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 3299–3306, 2020.
[16] S. Han, T. Kim, D. Kim, Y.-L. Park, and S. Jo, “Use of deep learning for
characterization of microfluidic soft sensors,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett.,
vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 873–880, Apr. 2018.
[17] T. Hellebrekers, N. Chang, K. Chin, M. J. Ford, O. Kroemer, and
C. Majidi, “Soft magnetic tactile skin for continuous force and location
estimation using neural networks,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 5, no. 3,
pp. 3892–3898, Jul. 2020.
[18] N. Sünderhauf et al., “The limits and potentials of deep learning for
robotics,” The Int. J. Robot. Res., vol. 37, no. 4/5, pp. 405–420, 2018.
[19] U. Culha, S. G. Nurzaman, F. Clemens, and F. Iida, “Svas3: Strain vector
aided sensorization of soft structures,” Sensors, vol. 14, no. 7, pp. 12748–
12770, 2014.
[20] F. Khan, R. J. Roesthuis, and S. Misra, “Force sensing in continuum
manipulators using fiber bragg grating sensors,” in IEEE/RSJ IROS., 2017,
pp. 2531–2536.
[21] S. E. Navarro et al., “A model-based sensor fusion approach for force and
shape estimation in soft robotics,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 5, no. 4,
pp. 5621–5628, Oct. 2020.
[22] T. G. Thuruthel, B. Shih, C. Laschi, and M. T. Tolley, “Soft robot perception
using embedded soft sensors and recurrent neural networks,” Sci. Robot.,
vol. 4, no. 26, p. eaav 1488, 2019.
[23] J. Y. Loo, Z. Y. Ding, E. Davies, S. G. Nurzaman, and C. P. Tan, “Curvature
and force estimation for a soft finger using an EKF with unknown input
optimization,” in IFAC-V 2020 World Congress. IFAC, 2020.
[24] C. Guo, G. Pleiss, Y. Sun, and K. Q. Weinberger, “On calibration of modern
neural networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. 2017, pp. 1321–1330.
[25] K. Lee, K. Lee, H. Lee, and J. Shin, “A simple unified framework for
detecting out-of-distribution samples and adversarial attacks,” in Proc.
Conf. Neural Infor. Process. Syst., 2018, pp. 7167–7177.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Soongsil University. Downloaded on March 05,2026 at 11:59:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

