SOFT ROBOTICS
Volume 11, Number 4, 2024
ª Mary Ann Liebert, Inc.
DOI: 10.1089/soro.2023.0049

Open camera or QR reader and
scan code to access this article
and other resources online.

ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Toward Onboard Proportional Control
of Multi-Chamber Soft Pneumatic Robots:
A Magnetorheological Elastomer Valve Array
Sihan Wang,1,* Peizhi Zhang,2,* Liang He,1 and Perla Maiolino1,3

Abstract

Soft pneumatic actuators (SPAs) are commonly used in various applications because of their structural compliance, low cost, ease of manufacture, high adaptability, and safe human–robot interaction. The traditional
approach for achieving proportional control of soft pneumatic robots requires the use of industrial proportional
valves or syringe drivers, which are not only rigid and bulky but also hard to be integrated into the body of soft
robots. In our previous research, we developed a Magnetorheological elastomer (MRE)-based soft valve that
showed advantages for controlling SPAs due to its compliance, compactness, robustness, and compatibility for
continuous pressure modulation. Modern soft robots with multiple chambers require more MRE valves onboard for
their control. However, merely packing more MRE valves for soft robots can cause problems like magnetic
interference, flow rate deviation, and overheating. Therefore, in this study, we proposed a two-dimensional MRE
valve array design to solve issues of magnetic interference and overheating when expanding from a single MRE
proportional valve into an integrated array. The magnetic interference and the overheating problem were investigated through multiphysics simulation, bringing the optimal choice of valve spacing (1.2 times the single valve
diameter), magnetic coil pole arrangement (same pole), and the cooling system design (internal cooling chamber
with flowing water). Physical experiments showed that our MRE valve array maintained its original flowrate
performance with low magnetic interference (0.89 mT) and low coil temperature (under 73.9C for 5 min).
Keywords: magnetorheological elastomer, proportional valve, cooling system, soft robotics
Introduction

S

oft pneumatic robots typically rely on the interaction
between highly compliant elastomeric materials and
regulated air to achieve desired functions.1 Thanks to their
easy fabrication, low cost, safe human–robot interaction, and

high adaptability in dynamic and unstructured environments,
an increasing number of researchers find pneumatic soft robots to be of interest. However, the precise control of the
pressure inside a soft pneumatic robot remains challenging
from the hardware perspective. Traditionally, this requires
a pneumatic system consisting of displacement pumps,

1

Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
Department of Modern Mechanical Engineering, Graduate Program for Embodiment Informatics for Leading Graduate Schools,
Waseda University, Shinjuku, Japan.
3
Department of Mechanics and Machine Design, University of Genova, Genova, Italy.
*Both these authors contributed equally to this work.
2

617

618

solenoid valves, syringe drivers, and electronic controllers.2,3
The cost and weight of such a pneumatic control system are
often much higher than the soft robot itself. Moreover, these
bulky and rigid devices can hardly be integrated into the soft
robots, making them usually tethered and lacking mobility.
Integrating pneumatic control systems into the soft robots
will be essential to develop the next generation of untethered
autonomous soft robots.
Various integrable devices for controlling soft pneumatic
robots have been developed in recent years to achieve onboard control for soft pneumatic robots.4 Pneumatically driven soft valves can perform computation and control for soft
robots without using electric elements. A significant work in
this direction is the silicone bistable valve, which exploits the
structural instability to regulate air channels in a digital
manner.5 The concept of the bistable membrane is then applied in many later works to achieve more advanced functions such as digital logic, memory, oscillators, and
pneumatic feedback regulators.6–9 These devices are used in
diverse robotic applications such as locomotion, programmable grasping, teleoperation, and so on.6,9–11
There are also works that exploit the actuator mechanics
and fluid viscosity to achieve the intelligent pressure distribution between multiple air chambers.12–14 In these works,
multiple actuators are connected to the same pressure supply,
and their actuation sequence is programmed through the interaction between the actuator body and flow viscosity. This
method does not require any active or passive valves, significantly reducing the system’s complexity. A limitation of
the approach is that it requires a precise model to predict and
program the exact behavior of the system. Apart from the
pneumatically driven devices, electrostatically and dielectrically driven pneumatic regulators use electric signals to
control soft robots, achieving a much faster response time of
<0.1 s.15,16 They require an operating voltage of over 500 V.
Another solution is using thermally-driven smart materials.17,18 As the environmental temperature changes, the soft
robot can passively adjust its behavior to adapt to the variation. One should note that these devices have a response time
of 25 min, making them hardly capable of active control.
The vast majority of the devices listed above work in a
digital ON/OFF manner. However, recent applications of soft
robots require not only binary ON/OFF control. The ability to
continuously alter the pressure or flow rate in an analog manner
provides advantages in various applications, including human–
robot interaction,19 adaptive grasping,20 soft pneumatic arm
control,21 and so on. A recent work introduces a pneumaticallydriven valve handcrafted by everyday objects that is capable of
analog pressure regulation.9 The valve controls the pressure
inside a soft actuator based on its input pneumatic pressure.
Other works focus on achieving proportional control based
on the interaction between magnetic fields and Magnetorheological (MR) fluids. By applying magnetic fields to the
MR fluids, the magnetic particles inside the MR fluids align
into chains, therefore increasing the local fluidic resistance.
The mechanism was initially used to achieve digital ON/OFF
control of soft actuators.22,23 In more recent work, the concept was proved to be capable of proportional control.24 By
controlling the magnetization of electro-permanent magnets
(EPMs), the researchers were able to precisely control the
pressure within various soft actuators. A limitation of this
approach is that using MR fluids as the actuation medium

WANG ET AL.

makes the system highly sensitive to any leakage and increases the overall weight of the system. The choice of materials used by the soft actuators is also limited.
Our previous work introduced a magnetorheological
elastomer (MRE) based proportional valve.25 MRE is a
family of smart materials first developed in the 1990s.26 They
are composite materials comprising magnetic particles dispersed in an elastomeric matrix. These magnetic particles,
typically micron-sized iron particles or magnetite, interact
with an external magnetic field, leading to a rearrangement of
the particles within the elastomer matrix. As a result, the
material’s mechanical properties can be altered in real time,
providing tunable and controllable behavior.27 One of the
initially exploited properties of MRE is its ability to change
stiffness when exposed to a magnetic flux. When a magnetic
field is applied, the magnetic particles within the elastomer
align themselves with the field lines, resulting in a significant
increase in the shear modulus. This percentage increase in
stiffness exceeds 100% under a magnetic field of no more than
0.5 T.28 Another important property of MRE that is highly
useful when developing valves or other pneumatic devices is its
magnetic-induced deformation. Due to the magnetization of the
particles inside the matrix and the compliant nature of the
elastomer that constitutes it, the MRE deforms along the exposed magnetic field with a response time in the order of a few
milliseconds.29 Moreover, the deformation increases relatively
linearly with the magnetic field strength.
Based on this property, researchers developed a rigid valve
exploiting MRE as the core actuator,30 achieving secure
regulation of airflow. Although this valve design is still bulky
and rigid, it shows that MRE has great potential to be used for
developing integrable proportional valves used by soft robots. Various other soft robotic devices have also been developed based on this characteristic such as microfluidic
pumps, soft actuators, and object grasping.31–33 Our previous
work on MRE-based valves uses this characteristic to regulate the pressure and flow rate of soft robots proportionally
and rapidly. Specifically, the air channel of the valve is enclosed between an MRE membrane and an electromagnet.
The deformation of the MRE membrane, which restricts the
airflow within the channel, can be controlled by adjusting the
magnetic field strength produced by the electromagnet.
The MRE-based proportional valve in our previous work
comes with a single channel, meaning that it is only capable of
controlling one pneumatic chamber. However, recently developed soft robots usually come with more complex structures
and multiple pneumatic chambers to achieve their tasks like
object manipulation or locomotion.34,35 This raises the number
of valves required. Simply packing multiple MRE valves in a
confined space may bring several problems. One crucial
problem is magnetic field interference between each coil,
which is commonly encountered when designing devices with
multiple magnetic field generators.36,37 The magnetic interference can not only disrupt the functioning of MRE valves
themselves but also affect nearby equipment.38 One typical
approach to solve the problem is magnetic shielding.39,40
However, the introduction of magnetic shields brings system
complexity and is challenging to be embedded into soft robots.
Another effective method is by increasing the coil spacing.41
Overheating of the coils is another common issue. Since
multiple coils are integrated into the soft robots, the accumulated heat will be more difficult to be dissipated, which

619

MRE VALVE ARRAY WITH A COOLING SYSTEM

prevents the long-term operation of the valves and brings
safety concerns. The predominant method used for dissipating heat from electromagnetic coils is fluidic cooling.42 There
is a broad range of coolants to choose from, including air,
water, and helium.42–44 The efficiency of such systems depends on the pumping power, the coolant type, the coolant
flow rate, and channel geometry.
In this work, we designed and developed an MRE array
that ensures each valve unit can work independently and
steadily in limited spaces. To address the magnetic interference problem, multiphysics finite-element simulations were
implemented to investigate the magnetic interference between valve units under different (1) valve spacing and (2)
pole arrangements. This provides the optimal array layout
which ensures sufficiently low magnetic interference. To
address the heat dissipation problem, the heat dissipation
efficiency of air cooling and fluid cooling was compared by
simulation and experiment. An embedded fluid cooling system was developed. As a result, the magnetic flux density
between two MRE valves in the array was 0.89 mT. The flow
rate characteristics of the MRE valves in the array remain
consistent with that of a single MRE valve without magnetic
interference, with a Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE) of
9.73 mL/min. The cooling system is capable of lowering the
coil temperature from 98.6C to 73.9C during operation.
Finally, a demonstration of the MRE valve array when controlling a soft robot with four soft pneumatic actuators (SPAs)
was implemented.
Methodology
MRE valve unit and its scaling up

Our previous work25 presents the design of an MRE-based
proportional valve for controlling pneumatic robots. An
electromagnet embedded in silicone is used to generate
magnetic fields while ensuring structural compliance. The
valve’s gate is created by enclosing a pressurized cavity between the MRE membrane and the electromagnet. The valve
operates in a ‘‘normally-open’’ mode. When no current flows
through the coil, there is no force applied by the MRE, allowing air to move freely through the air channel. However,
when an electric current flows through the coil, it generates a
magnetic field. This magnetic field magnetizes the MRE,
causing it to be drawn toward the concentration of the mag-

netic flux and therefore restricting the valve’s gate. As the
electric current increases, this ‘‘restriction’’ effect gradually
intensifies, eventually resulting in the complete cessation of
airflow. Figure 1 shows the structure of the MRE valve single
unit while the detailed dimensions and materials of the MRE
valve are included in the Supplementary Information S1 in
the Supplementary Data.
One should note that each MRE valve unit is only capable
of controlling one independent pneumatic chamber. To perform more advanced tasks such as object manipulation34 and
locomotion,35 more MRE valve units are required to simultaneously control multiple pneumatic actuators. This raises
the need for a compact MRE array structure enabling each
valve unit to work steadily and accurately. However, merely
packing MRE valves into a limited space without investigation may cause magnetic interference and overheating
problems.
Magnetic interference

The magnetic interference problem of the MRE valve array involves two aspects: (1) the interference between the
MRE valve array and its surrounding environment and (2) the
interference between neighboring valve units within the array. The MRE valve array as a whole should have the least
amount of magnetic flux leaked to the environment so that it
won’t affect the operation of external sensors or actuators.
Meanwhile, the characteristics of every single valve unit
should stay unaffected by the operation of its neighboring
units, so that each MRE valve unit can be controlled independently and accurately.
By investigating the magnetic interference with different
valve spacing and magnetic pole arrangement, one can find
the optimal array layout which keeps sufficiently low magnetic interference while minimizing the size of the array. As
the valve spacing gets sparser, the magnetic interference is
suppressed significantly, but the overall size of the array also
increases. The magnetic pole arrangement is also an important factor to be investigated. When the magnetic poles
for neighboring coils are opposite, the magnetic interference
can be strengthened due to the formation of a closed magnetic loop.
COMSOL Multiphysics was used to simulate and analyze magnetic field interference. The magnetic interference
with different MRE valve spacing and pole arrangement was

FIG. 1. MRE valve single unit structure. (A) Shows the photo of a single MRE-based proportional valve. An MRE
membrane is located on top of an electromagnet embedded in silicone. The controlled air channel is located between the coil
and the MRE membrane. (B) Shows the cross-section view of the MRE valve. By applying an electric current to the
electromagnet, a magnetic field whose strength is controllable can be generated. This magnetic field deforms the MRE
membrane, therefore achieving a continuous flow rate or pressure modulation in the controlled air channel. MRE, magnetorheological elastomer.

620

WANG ET AL.

FIG. 2. Simulation results of the magnetic field with different magnetic pole arrangements and MRE valve spacing.
(A) Shows the magnetic field distribution at the plane of the air channel with different valve spacing and pole arrangements.
(B) Shows the magnetic flux density along the air channel of the valve when the neighboring unit has the same pole
arrangement. (C) Shows the magnetic flux density along the air channel of the valve when the neighboring unit has the
opposite pole arrangement. The benchmark (magnetic flux density of a single valve without interference) is shown in both
(B, C) for ease of comparison. The enlargement views of the curve peaks are also given for clarity.
investigated. Since the coil diameter is 18 mm, the valve
spacing investigated in the simulation ranged from 18 to
38 mm. For each valve spacing, both the ‘‘same’’ and ‘‘opposite’’ pole arrangements were considered. An electric
current of 2 A was engaged in a pair of neighboring valves,
and the resultant magnetic field was simulated. The detailed
settings of the simulation can be found in Supplementary
Information S2 in the Supplementary Data. By comparing the
simulated magnetic field within the neighboring valves in the
array against the original magnetic field within a single MRE
valve, the intensity of magnetic interference was obtained.
The magnetic field distribution with different valve spacing and pole arrangements is presented in Figure 2A. Compared with the same pole arrangement, the opposite pole
arrangement brings a generally stronger magnetic field, especially at the region between the two valves. This indicates
an undesirably strong magnetic interference with the surrounding environment.
The magnetic flux density along the valve channel in the
MRE valve array with the same and opposite pole arrangement is presented in Figure 2B and C. The magnetic flux
density of a single MRE valve with no interference is considered the benchmark for comparison. To minimize the
characteristics change when the valve is placed in an array, it

is desirable to have a magnetic flux density curve that resembles the benchmark. With a similar magnetic flux distribution along the valve channel, a single MRE valve design
can be easily adapted into an array without recharacterization.
It can be observed that the opposite magnetic pole arrangement
brings a much stronger magnetic flux density along the air
channel than the benchmark. The peak value observed along
the air channel is 0.71 T, 22% higher than the benchmark. In
contrast, the magnetic flux density in the same pole arrangement was much closer to the benchmark. The peak value observed is 0.6 T, only 3% higher than the benchmark. Therefore,
the same magnetic pole arrangement can bring the least change
in valve characteristics.
By comparing the magnetic flux density under different
valve spacing, one can observe a marginal utility in relation to
the increased valve spacing and its impact on magnetic interference suppression. The peak magnetic interference does decrease with a larger valve spacing, but converges when the
valve spacing exceeds 30 mm. Further enlarging the valve
spacing over 30 mm results in an increase in system bulkiness
without yielding significant benefits. Therefore, we confirmed
that the MRE valve array with the same pole arrangement and a
valve spacing of 30 mm (1.2 times the diameter of a single
valve unit) could satisfy our requirements.

621

MRE VALVE ARRAY WITH A COOLING SYSTEM
Heat dissipation

For a single MRE valve unit, the raise in temperature with
different amounts of electric current has been measured and
presented in Figure 3A. It took 348, 130, and 62 s for the
MRE valve to reach 70C with a continuous current of 1 A,
1.75 A, and 2.5 A, respectively. When multiple coils are
densely packed in a confined space in an MRE valve array,
the issue of overheating becomes severe. The rapid temperature rise during operation imposes several constraints on the
MRE valve array, such as reduced life span, unpredictable
characteristics, and safety concerns. The entire heat dissipation process of the MRE array can be described as follows.
First, the coil generated heat which can be described with
Joule’s law of heating. The heat travels through the silicone
housing and MRE membrane through thermal conduction.
Finally, the heat is released into the surrounding air by
thermal convection. Heat conduction can be described by
Fourier’s Law as below:

Qc ¼  kAc

dT
dX

(1)

where Qc is the heat dissipation rate required by the valve
unit, Ac is the cross-sectional area through which conduction
occurs (i.e., the surface area of the coil), k is the thermal
conductivity of the material (i.e., silicone), dT is the change in
temperature, and dX is the change in distance.
The heat convection, that is, heat transfer between the
valve unit and surrounding environment, can be described as
Newton’s Law of Cooling as below:
Qv ¼ hAv ðTs  T1 Þ

(2)

where Qv is the heat dissipation rate required by the valve unit,
A is the cross-sectional area through which conduction occurs
(i.e., the surface area of the valve), h is the heat transfer coefficient, Ts is the surface temperature of the valve, and TN is

FIG. 3. Thermal analysis on the MRE valve array. (A) Shows the measured and simulated temperature curve of a single
MRE valve under different amounts of electric current. The measured data were obtained by attaching a temperature sensor
to the surface of a single MRE valve, while the simulated data were obtained when the convective heat transfer coefficient
was set to 9.2 W/m2$K. (B) Shows the simulated temperature distribution of the MRE valve array without a cooling system
over a period of 1500 s. (C) Presents the simulated temperature-time curve at the center of the MRE valve units when the
array is without a cooling system. (D) Shows the simulated temperature distribution of the MRE valve array with a cooling
system over a period of 1500 s. (E) Presents the simulated temperature-time curve at the center of the MRE valve units when
the array comes with the proposed cooling system.

622

WANG ET AL.

the temperature of the cooling materials. T1 is set to the ambient temperature (25C). Since the copper coil we used can
sustain a maximum temperature of 155C, we set Ts to 155C
also as the maximum operating temperature. And Qv is equal to
Qc for sustainable heat dissipation, which can be described as:
Qv ¼ Qc ¼ I 2 R:

(3)

where I is the applied current, and R is the resistance of the
coil. By substituting all known values into Equations (1–3),
the required value of h that keeps the coil temperature under
155C can be obtained. h should be over 1000 W/m2$K to
ensure sustainable heat dissipation of the valve. In contrast,
by matching the measured temperature increase curve of the
MRE valve unit with the results obtained from the simulation
(Fig. 3A), it can be found that the actual convective heat
transfer coefficient between the MRE valve and the air under
free convection h is only 9 W/m2$K. This actual h value is
significantly lower than the required value for sustainable
heat dissipation. Only the forced convection in liquids can
provide a convective heat transfer coefficient larger than
1000 W/m2$K.45 Therefore, a cooling system with flowing
liquid is necessary.
Simulations were constructed to compare the difference in
heat dissipation with and without a cooling system. For the
cooling system simulation, we applied an S-shape cooling belt
design, where water flows within the belt surrounding each
valve unit. The detailed geometry of the cooling belt can be
found in Design and Fabrication of MRE Valve Array section.
For the system without cooling, the MRE valves were directly
embedded into the silicone. The heat transfer coefficient between the MRE array and the surrounding air h was set to 9.2
W/m2$K, as investigated before. The water flow in the cooling
belt is set as a laminar flow with a flow rate of 0.36 L/min. The
electric current through all electromagnets is set to 1.5 A.
A time-dependent study was implemented, whose detailed
settings can be found in Supplementary Information S3 in the
Supplementary Data. The temperature increase of the MRE
valve array center was recorded from 0 to 1500 s, while the
thermal images of the MRE valve array were recorded every
150 s. The results are shown in Figure 3B–E.
Figure 3C shows that the temperature of the MRE valve
array increased continuously until 400C without a cooling
system. With the cooling system, the temperature converged
at 140C after 600 s (Fig. 3E). The simulation results showed
that such a water cooling system is capable to keep the coil
temperature below 155C, ensuring that MRE valves in the
array work continuously and safely. In the following section,
we focused on the design and fabrication to achieve such a
cooling system in practice.
Design and fabrication of MRE valve array

To conduct cooling fluid into the valve array, a cooling
chamber that tightly wounds the valves in an S shape is introduced, as shown in Figure 4B. The layout of the cooling
channel is designed in this particular way to achieve both efficient cooling by maximizing contact area with the valves and
ease of manufacture by having only one single cooling channel
without any forks. The cooling chamber has a rectangular
cross-section of 8 · 2 mm. Water is filled into the chamber and
driven by a micro pump to ensure sufficient flow rate.

A cooling device was used to cool down the fluid after the
heat was exchanged with the coils. As presented in
Figure 4A, the cooling device consists of a tank, two Peltier
plates, a radiator, and a cooling fan. The tank, Peltier plates,
radiator, and cooling fan had the same contact area of
40 · 40 mm for seamless matching. Thermal conductive
double-sided adhesive tape is used to attach them together.
Silicone tubes were used to connect the pump, cooling device, and MRE valve array together into a loop.
The fabrication procedure of the MRE valve array is shown
in Figure 4C–E. First, a silicone cooling belt with an internal
chamber was fabricated. Four coils and the prefabricated
cooling belt were then placed together in a rectangular mold.
Uncured silicone is then poured inside for casting the base
layer of the MRE valve. After fabricating the base layer, we
fabricated the MRE layer directly on top of the base layer as
four independent circular pieces. The method of making the air
channels between the base layer and the MRE layer was the
same as our previous work when fabricating a single MRE
valve unit.25 Mylar strips (2 mm width, 0.075 mm thickness)
were placed between the electromagnets and the MRE membrane before curing and later removed to create an air channel.
The overall size of the MRE valve array is 60 · 60 · 15 mm.
Results

To prove the validity of the proposed design, the fabricated
MRE valve array (30 mm valve spacing, same pole arrangement, cooling system engaged) was tested in terms of
both magnetic interference and heat dissipation. Finally, the
fabricated MRE valve array was used to control the actuation
of a multichamber soft pneumatic robot.
Magnetic interference

To investigate the amount of magnetic flux leaked to the
surrounding environment, a hall sensor (SS490; Honeywell)
was perpendicularly placed between two adjacent valve units
on top of the MRE membrane to measure the magnetic flux
density. The current was then applied to the two valves from 0
to 3 A with 0.5 A steps. Both the ‘‘same’’ and ‘‘opposite’’ pole
arrangements were tested by changing the current direction,
and the corresponding results are presented in Figure 5A.
As shown in Figure 5A, the measured magnetic flux density increases linearly as the electric current increases. When
applying the same pole arrangement, the magnetic field is
significantly less than the opposite pole arrangement. This is
consistent with the simulation results presented in Figure 2.
The maximum magnetic field for the ‘‘opposite’’ and
‘‘same’’ pole arrangements is 24.0 and 0.89 mT, respectively.
Our findings in Figure 5A confirm that the magnetic interference between the MRE valve array and its environment
can be sufficiently suppressed when the same magnetic polarity is applied with a valve spacing of 30 mm.
The second aspect investigated in terms of magnetic interference is whether the flow rate characteristics of a particular
MRE valve in the array are affected by the operation of its
neighboring valves. In this evaluation, we measured the flow rate
characteristics of a random MRE valve unit in the array while its
neighboring valves were operating with either the same or the
opposite polarity. The measured flow rate characteristics were
then compared with the flow rate characteristics of a single MRE
valve as the benchmark. The upstream pressure applied to the

MRE VALVE ARRAY WITH A COOLING SYSTEM

623

FIG. 4. Design and fabrication of the MRE valve array and its cooling system.
(A) Shows a photo of the
MRE valve array and its
cooling system. The yellow
block shows the MRE valve
array consisting of four MRE
valve units. The cooling
chamber of the MRE valve
array is connected in a loop
with a micropump and a
cooling device (a fan, a radiator, two Peltier plates, and
a water tank). Cooling water
is driven by the micropump,
bringing the heat generated
by the MRE valve array to
the cooling device, so that it
maintains the valve array at a
safe temperature. (B) Shows
the top and cross-sectional
view of the MRE valve array.
(C–E) Shows the fabrication
process of the MRE valve
array. First, a cooling belt
with a rectangular internal
chamber was fabricated. It
was then placed together
with four coils into a mold as
shown in (C). Next, the silicone is poured into the mold
and covers the coils and the
cooling belt, as shown in
(D). Finally, the MRE membrane is fabricated on top,
and silicone tubes are attached, as shown in (E).
valve channel was kept at 15 kPa, while the downstream was
directly connected to the atmosphere. The electric current applied to the tested MRE valve ranged from 0.5 to 3 A with 0.5 A
steps. The result is represented in Figure 5B.
As shown in Figure 5B, the flow rate decreases as the current increases since the MRE membrane is attracted closer to
the electromagnet under the larger magnetic field. The opposite pole arrangement brings a lower flow rate profile compared with the benchmark, with a RMSE of 27.9 mL/min. This

matches our simulation results (Fig. 2) which tell that the
magnetic flux density along the air channel is larger with opposite pole arrangement. In contrast, the measured flow rate
profile with the same pole arrangement is desirably closer to
the benchmark, with an RMSE of only 9.73 mL/min. This
indicates that, with the same pole arrangement, the magnetic
interference is negligible so that the behavior of each MRE
valve unit in the array stays the same as a single MRE valve.
Our previous work has shown that an MRE valve with such a

FIG. 5. Experimental results about the magnetic interference of the MRE valve
array. (A) Shows the measured magnetic flux density in
the middle of two MRE valve
units under different amounts
of electric current and different pole arrangements. The
magnetic field shows good
linearity along with the current. (B) Shows the measured
flow rate through the valve
channel
under
different
amounts of electric current
and pole arrangement.

624

flow rate-current profile can be used as a proportional valve to
achieve precise flow rate and pressure regulation.25 This
means that the proposed MRE valve array is capable of
achieving simultaneous, proportional control over multiple
pneumatic actuators.
Heat dissipation

In the heat dissipation evaluation, we measured the temperature response of the MRE array with and without the
cooling system. A thermal camera (Fluke Ti100) was used to
capture thermal images. The initial temperature was set to the
ambient temperature of 25C. Two phases were investigated
during the tests, a working phase and a cooling phase. During

WANG ET AL.

the working phase, all four MRE units in the array were
supplied with an electric current of 2 A. During the cooling
phase, the current in the valves was shut down. The working
and cooling phases lasted 5 and 10 min, respectively. Thermal images were recorded in the working and cooling states
every 10 and 60 s, respectively.
The captured thermal images are shown in Figure 6. The
temperatures on two particular points are stated, one is at the
center of the MRE valve array, while the other is at the center
of a single MRE valve unit. After the entire working phase,
the temperature at the center of the MRE valve unit increases
from 25.8C to 73.9C with the cooling system and from
25.0C to 98.6C without the cooling system, respectively.
The temperature at the array center increases from 24.4C to

FIG. 6. Experimental results about the heat dissipation of the MRE valve array with and without a cooling system. (A) Shows
the temperature distribution of the MRE array with a cooling system every 10 s during the working phase. (B) Shows the
temperature distribution of the MRE array without the cooling system every 10 s during the working phase. (C) Shows
the temperature distribution of the MRE array with a cooling system every 60 s during the cooling phase. (D) Shows the
temperature distribution of the MRE array without the cooling system every 60 s during the cooling phase.

625

MRE VALVE ARRAY WITH A COOLING SYSTEM

34.9C with the cooling system and from 24.3C to 48.4C
without the cooling system, respectively. The temperature of
the MRE array using a cooling system is much lower than that
without a cooling system, and the difference is up to 25C in
the center of the coil. The lowered temperature guarantees the
long working life of the MRE valves and the safety of the
surrounding environment.
In the cooling phase, we can observe that with the cooling
system, the temperature decreases from 37.0C to 28.7C at the
MRE valve center and from 76.2C to 30.9C at the center of the
coil. However, without the cooling system, the whole structure
becomes uniformly hot due to the thermal conduction and the
temperature is around 53C at the end of the cooling phase,
which is the same as the simulation results indicate (Fig. 3). The
effect of the cooling belt is verified by the improved heat dis-

sipation during both the working and cooling phases, which
insists with the evaluation results and meets our goal.
Demonstration

The proposed MRE valve array design minimizes the effect of magnetic interference and overheating, ensuring that
the MRE valves in the array work steadily, independently,
and safely. To illustrate its application, a soft pneumatic robot
with four independent PneuNet actuators (silicone-casted
bending actuators46) was fabricated and controlled by the
MRE valve array. Each actuator was connected to an MRE
valve in the array. The specific schematics can be found in
Figure 7B. The valve array operated continuously and controlled the robot through different configurations for around

FIG. 7. A four-chamber soft robot controlled by the MRE valve array. The structure of the robot is shown in (A). It
consists of four silicone-made PneuNet soft actuators. Each actuator is connected to an MRE valve unit in the array as
shown in (B). By activating and deactivating the valves, the soft robot exhibits different configurations. (C–J) Shows the
different configurations of the soft robot controlled by the MRE valve array, together with the pressure within each
pneumatic actuator.

626

2 min. First, the limbs were straightened sequentially. Next,
the limbs were straightened in pairs. Finally, all the limbs
were straightened together twice. The different configurations of the soft robot controlled by the MRE valve array are
presented in Figure 7C–J. The demonstration (shown in
Supplementary Video S1) illustrates that the proposed MRE
valve array is able to control multichamber soft robots
through various configurations.
Conclusion

In this study, we proposed an MRE valve array design that
enables each valve unit to work independently and steadily over
long-term operation. Through investigating the magnetic interference and overheating problem, we designed the distance
between each MRE valve unit (30 mm), the magnetic pole arrangement (same polarity), and the cooling system (S-shape
cooling chamber with forced liquid). The physical experiments
verified that the proposed MRE valve array ensures that each
valve unit inside stays unaffected by magnetic interference and
therefore has the same characteristics as a single MRE valve.
This means that the MRE valve array can be used for proportional control over multiple SPAs. Results also showed that the
cooling system efficiently dissipates the heat generated from the
coils and maintains the temperature at a lower level. Finally, a
demonstration was presented to illustrate the applications of the
MRE valve array when controlling multichamber soft robots.
The proposed MRE array system comes with unique advantages when controlling soft pneumatic robots when controlling multiple actuators. Unlike industrial proportional
valves, the silicone nature of the MRE valve array ensures its
seamless integration with soft robots without sacrificing their
structural compliance. The total cost of the valve array (below
$5 per unit) is also much lower than its industrial counterparts.
Due to the compact arrangement of coils, the size of each valve
unit in the array is 30 · 30 · 17 mm. This is smaller than the
existing soft proportional valves such as the programmable soft
valves made with everyday objects (15 · 15 · 80 mm).9 Another advantage of the MRE valve array is its fast response. Our
previous work has shown that the valve can be placed in a
proportional-integral-differential control loop with a control
frequency over 50 Hz, much faster than the other works with a
response time of over 1 s.5,24 Finally, the MRE valve array does
not require specific types of fluid to be used by the soft robots,
significantly broadening its application.23
Despite these capabilities, the MRE valve array system still
presents several directions for future work. With the increase of
degree-of-freedom of soft robots, the number of valves also
needs to be increased. The 30 mm restriction in horizontal valve
spacing inevitably makes the valve array flat and huge. This
restriction could be reduced using smaller electromagnetic
coils. A three-dimensional MRE valve matrix could also solve
the problem. An investigation of the vertical arrangement of
valves will be performed. Moreover, the current cooling system
introduces an additional fluidic input into the MRE valve array.
This not only raises the system’s complexity and cost but also
limits its application in those challenging scenarios when
there’s only limited space onboard for soft robots or when the
usage of water brings safety concerns. The limitation can be
addressed in the future by (1) integrating the water pump and
radiators into the valve array for a more compact system or (2)
replacing the coils with EPMs for reduced heat generation.

WANG ET AL.
Authors’ Contributions

S.W.: methodology (lead), validation (equal), visualization (lead), writing—original draft preparation (equal),
writing—reviewing and editing (lead). P.Z.: methodology
(lead), software (lead), validation (equal), writing—original
draft (equal), writing—review and editing (supporting). L.H.:
conceptualization (lead), methodology (supporting), writing—
review and editing (supporting), supervision (lead). P.M.:
conceptualization (lead), methodology (supporting), writing—
review and editing (lead), supervision (lead), project administration (lead), funding acquisition (lead).
Author Disclosure Statement

No competing financial interests exist.
Funding Information

This work was supported by the Engineering and Physical
Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) ‘‘From Sensing to
Collaboration’’ (EP/V000748/1). S.W. was supported by the
CSC-PAG Oxford Scholarship for his DPhil study; P.Z. was
supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant number 21J13536 and
Leading Program of Waseda University.
Supplementary Material

Supplementary Data
Supplementary Video S1
References

1. Rus D, Tolley MT. Design, fabrication and control of soft
robots. Nature 2015;521(7553):467–475.
2. Wijnen B, Hunt EJ, Anzalone GC, et al. Open-source syringe pump library. PLoS One 2014;9(9):e107216.
3. Zhang B, Chen J, Ma X, et al. Pneumatic system capable of
supplying programmable pressure states for soft robots.
Soft Robot 2022;9(5):1001–1013.
4. McDonald K, Ranzani T. Hardware methods for onboard
control of fluidically actuated soft robots. Front Robot AI
2021:8:720702.
5. Rothemund P, Ainla A, Belding L, et al. A soft, bistable
valve for autonomous control of soft actuators. Sci Robot
2018;3(16):eaar7986.
6. Preston DJ, Rothemund P, Jiang HJ, et al. Digital logic for soft
devices. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2019;116(16):7750–7759.
7. Wang S, He L, Maiolino P. A modular approach to design
multi-channel bistable valves for integrated pneumaticallydriven soft robots via 3D-printing. IEEE Robot Autom Lett
2022;7(2):3412–3418.
8. Nemitz MP, Abrahamsson CK, Wille L, et al. Soft NonVolatile Memory for Non-Electronic Information Storage
in Soft Robots. In: 2020 3rd IEEE International Conference
on Soft Robotics (RoboSoft). IEEE, New Haven, Connecticut, USA; 2020; pp. 7–12.
9. Decker CJ, Jiang HJ, Nemitz MP, et al. Programmable soft
valves for digital and analog control. Proc Natl Acad Sci U
S A 2022;119(40):e2205922119.
10. Hubbard JD, Acevedo R, Edwards KM, et al. Fully 3Dprinted soft robots with integrated fluidic circuitry. Sci Adv
2021;7(29):eabe5257.
11. Jin L, Forte AE, Bertoldi K. Mechanical valves for onboard flow control of inflatable robots. Adv Sci 2021;8(21):
2101941.

MRE VALVE ARRAY WITH A COOLING SYSTEM

12. Gorissen B, Milana E, Baeyens A, et al. Hardware sequencing of inflatable nonlinear actuators for autonomous
soft robots. Adv Mater 2019;31(3):1804598.
13. Matia Y, Kaiser GH, Shepherd RF, et al. Harnessing nonuniform pressure distributions in soft robotic actuators. Adv
Intell Syst 2023;5(2):2200330.
14. Ben-Haim E, Salem L, Or Y, et al. Single-input control of
multiple fluid-driven elastic actuators via interaction between
bistability and viscosity. Soft Robot 2020;7(2):259–265.
15. Diteesawat R, Helps T, Taghavi M, et al. Electropneumatic pumps for soft robotics. Sci Robot 2021;6(51):
eabc3721.
16. Xu S, Chen Y, Nak-Seung PH, et al. A dynamic electrically
driven soft valve for control of soft hydraulic actuators.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2021;118(34):e2103198118.
17. Kalairaj MS, Banerjee H, Kumar KS, et al. Thermoresponsive hydrogel-based soft valves with annular actuation
calibration and circumferential gripping. Bioengineering
2021;8(9):127.
18. Liu RH, Bonanno J, Yang J, et al. Single-use, thermally
actuated paraffin valves for microfluidic applications. Sens
Actuators B Chem 2004;98(2–3):328–336.
19. Polygerinos P, Correll N, Morin SA, et al. Soft robotics: Review of fluid-driven intrinsically soft devices; manufacturing,
sensing, control, and applications in human-robot interaction.
Adv Eng Mater 2017;19(12):1700016.
20. Subad RASI, Cross LB, Park K. Soft robotic hands and
tactile sensors for underwater robotics. Appl Mech 2021;
2(2):356–382.
21. George Thuruthel T, Ansari Y, Falotico E, et al. Control
strategies for soft robotic manipulators: A survey. Soft
Robot 2018;5(2):149–163.
22. Balak R, Mazumdar YC. Bistable valves for MR fluidbased soft robotic actuation systems. IEEE Robot Autom
Lett 2021;6(4):8285–8292.
23. McDonald K, Rendos A, Woodman S, et al. Magnetorheological fluid-based flow control for soft robots. Adv
Intell Syst 2020;2(11):2000139.
24. McDonald KJ, Kinnicutt L, Moran AM, et al. Modulation
of magnetorheological fluid flow in soft robots using
electropermanent magnets. IEEE Robot Automat Lett
2022;7(2):3914–3921.
25. Wang S, He L, Albini A, et al. A magnetorheological
elastomer-based proportional valve for soft pneumatic actuators. Adv Intell Syst 2023;5:2200238.
26. Ginder JM, Nichols ME, Elie LD, et al. Magnetorheological Elastomers: Properties and Applications. In: Smart
Structures and Materials 1999: Smart Materials Technologies. Vol. 3675, SPIE, Newport Beach, CA, United States;
1999; pp. 131–138.
27. Li Y, Li J, Li W, et al. A state-of-the-art review on magnetorheological elastomer devices. Smart Mater Struct
2014;23(12):123001.
28. Liu T, Xu Y. Magnetorheological Elastomers: Materials and
Applications. In: Smart and Functional Soft Materials.
IntechOpen: London, UK; 2019; p. 5.
29. Vatandoost H, Hemmatian M, Sedaghati R, et al. Dynamic
characterization of isotropic and anisotropic magnetorheological elastomers in the oscillatory squeeze mode superimposed on large static pre-strain. Compos Part B Eng
2020;182:107648.
30. Böse H, Rabindranath R, Ehrlich J. Soft magnetorheological elastomers as new actuators for valves. J Intell Mater
Syst Struct 2012;23(9):989–994.

627

31. Tang SY, Zhang X, Sun S, et al. Versatile microfluidic
platforms enabled by novel magnetorheological elastomer
microactuators. Adv Funct Mater 2018;28(8):1705484.
32. Kashima S, Miyasaka F, Hirata K. Novel soft actuator using magnetorheological elastomer. IEEE Trans Magnet
2012;48(4):1649–1652.
33. Zhang P, Kamezaki M, He Z, et al. EPM–MRE: Electropermanent magnet–magnetorheological elastomer for soft
actuation system and its application to robotic grasping.
IEEE Robot Autom Lett 2021;6(4):8181–8188.
34. Elfferich JF, Dodou D, Della Santina C. Soft robotic
grippers for crop handling or harvesting: A review. IEEE
Access 2022;10:75428–75443.
35. Yin A, Lin HC, Thelen J, et al. Combining locomotion and
grasping functionalities in soft robots. Adv Intell Syst 2019;
1(8):1900089.
36. Kong S, Bae B, Jung DH, et al. An investigation of
electromagnetic radiated emission and interference from
multi-coil wireless power transfer systems using resonant
magnetic field coupling. IEEE Trans Microw Theory Tech
2015;63(3):833–846.
37. Spiezia G, Losito R, Martino M, et al. Automatic test bench
for measurement of magnetic interference on LVDTs. IEEE
Trans Instrum Meas 2011;60(5):1802–1810.
38. Fu J, Ning Z, Chang Y. Active compensation method for
strong magnetic interference of MEMS electronic compass.
IEEE Access 2021;9:48860–48872.
39. Man J, Ding F, Li Q, et al. Novel high-speed electromagnetic
actuator with permanent-magnet shielding for high-pressure
applications. IEEE Trans Magnet 2010;46(12):4030–4033.
40. Kim H, Song C, Kim J, et al. Design of Magnetic Shielding for
Reduction of Magnetic near Field from Wireless Power
Transfer System for Electric Vehicle. In: 2014 International
Symposium on Electromagnetic Compatibility. IEEE, Tokyo,
Japan; 2014; pp. 53–58.
41. Raaijmakers A, Ipek O, Klomp D, et al. Design of a radiative
surface coil array element at 7 T: The single-side adapted
dipole antenna. Magn Reson Med 2011;66(5):1488–1497.
42. Lampasi A, Coletti A, Novello L, et al. Final design of the
switching network units for the JT-60SA central solenoid.
Fusion Eng Des 2014;89(4):342–348.
43. Azarkish H, Barrau J, Coudrain P, et al. Self-Adaptive
Microvalve Array for Energy Efficient Fluidic Cooling in
Microelectronic Systems. In: 2017 16th IEEE Intersociety
Conference on Thermal and Thermomechanical Phenomena in Electronic Systems (ITherm). IEEE, Florida, USA;
2017; pp. 522–529.
44. Wang L, Wu H, Li L, et al. The helium cooling system and
cold mass support system for the MICE coupling solenoid.
IEEE Trans Appl Superconduct 2008;18(2):941–944.
45. Kurganov V. Heat Transfer Coefficient. In: Thermopedia.
Begel House, Inc., 2011.
46. Mosadegh B, Polygerinos P, Keplinger C, et al. Pneumatic
networks for soft robotics that actuate rapidly. Adv Funct
Mater 2014;24(15):2163–2170.

Address correspondence to:
Sihan Wang
Department of Engineering Science
University of Oxford
Oxford OX1 2JD
United Kingdom
E-mail: sihan.wang@eng.ox.ac.uk

