88

IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON MECHATRONICS, VOL. 24, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2019

Configuration Estimation for Accurate Position
Control of Large-Scale Soft Robots
Phillip Hyatt , Dustan Kraus , Vallan Sherrod, Levi Rupert , Nathan Day, and Marc D. Killpack

Abstract—There is a significant trend in robotics of exploring passively compliant and low inertia systems that
can safely make contact with the environment. This paper
defines many of the problems associated with developing
effective control of soft, pneumatically actuated, inflatable
robots, and proposes an approach to solving a subset of
these problems. We show that we can obtain a global measurement of orientation for a given soft-robot link using two
different types of sensors (not including motion capture).
Given the orientation measurement, it is possible to estimate relative configurations of the soft actuators and joints.
In order to validate the ability to control position and orientation at the end effector, we show a new method for calibrating the coordinate frames of two unrelated measurement
systems. Then, using one of our configuration estimation
methods, we demonstrate its viability by performing simple
behaviors with a large-scale (approximately 1.5 m long) softrobot platform attached to the K-Rex rover at NASA Ames in
an outdoor environment. Our results also show the importance of soft-robot kinematic calibration and the sensitivity
of a soft robot to simple perturbations in the structure like
deflation and reinflation. Finally, we show that end effector
error can be significantly reduced by doing a form of servoing. In summary, our approach and demonstrations show
effective soft-robot configuration estimation and control for
large-scale soft robots capable of performing manipulation
tasks.
Index Terms—Calibration, motion control, pneumatic actuators, pose estimation, robot kinematics, soft robotics,
state estimation, visual servoing.

I. INTRODUCTION
RADITIONAL, rigid robots are very effective in factories
and in structured settings where the environment is known
or carefully constrained. However, they fall short in situations
where a model of the environment is incomplete and contact

T

Manuscript received February 5, 2018; revised June 15, 2018 and
October 10, 2018; accepted October 17, 2018. Date of publication October 26, 2018; date of current version February 14, 2019. This work
was supported in part by the NASA Early Career Faculty under Grant
NNX14A051G, and in part by the NASA Small Business Innovation Research Phase II grant that has made this research possible. (Phillip Hyatt,
Dustan Kraus, Vallan Sherrod, and Levi Rupert contributed equally to this
work.) Recommended by Technical Editor K. K. Leang. (Corresponding
author: Marc Killpack.)
The authors are with the Mechanical Engineering Department,
Brigham Young University, Provo, UT 84602 USA (e-mail:, phyatt16@
gmail.com; dustan.kraus@gmail.com; cbcrider@milemark11.com; levi.
rupert@gmail.com; nathanday89@gmail.com; marc_killpack@byu.
edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available
online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMECH.2018.2878228

is unavoidable or even desirable. The ability to work in an
unpredictable or unmodeled environment safely is becoming
increasingly important for robots as they are deployed in our
homes, schools, hospitals, and any area with humans or fragile
equipment. Soft robots provide a solution to using robots in
these environments by maintaining safety without increasing
cost through expensive sensor arrays. Besides incidental contact
with the environment, soft robots can be used to make intentional
contact in ways that rigid robots often cannot, such as using a
hammer or other impact tool. Other advantages of soft robots
are related to the ease of transport of such systems. An inflatable
robot, such as the platforms used in this work, can be deflated to
be transported as a small, lightweight package that can then be
reinflated at its destination with almost no assembly required.
This is very convenient in applications such as space exploration
or search and rescue where volume and weight restrictions are
stringent.
Unfortunately, many practical problems still need to be addressed before soft robots can become useful in the applications
mentioned above. There has recently been significant work in
the control of soft robots as outlined in Section II. There is,
however, a need for practical and robust methods of kinematic
modeling, joint-angle estimation, and end effector servoing to
enable accurate positioning and eventually trajectory tracking
at the end effector. While several of the methods that are explained in this paper were developed for traditional robotics, we
show a novel application of them that enables effective control
of large-scale soft robots.
Our specific contributions in this paper include the following.
1) A method for estimating joint configuration for soft actuators using relative orientation measurements.
2) A method to determine a useful (albeit approximate) kinematic model for a soft-robot arm.
3) A task-space control method that enables accurate positioning of the end effector of a large-scale soft-robot
manipulator.
4) An algorithm to relate any two pose measurement systems
attached to a soft robot by collecting data while moving
the soft-robot arm.
In this paper, we address multiple aspects of the difficult
problem of soft-robot configuration estimation and control. We
first describe related work and the hardware used for demonstrations in Section II. We then describe an algorithm to relate
two unrelated pose measurement systems (since we use various
sensors throughout this paper to measure pose) in Section III. In
Section IV, we explain our methods for estimating approximate

1083-4435 © 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Soongsil University. Downloaded on March 05,2026 at 11:58:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HYATT et al.: CONFIGURATION ESTIMATION FOR ACCURATE POSITION CONTROL OF LARGE-SCALE SOFT ROBOTS

Fig. 1. Six-DoF soft robot Kaa with HTC Vive trackers attached. The
frames are assigned at each joint in the zero configuration with red,
green, and blue (RGB) axes corresponding to the X Y Z axes, respectively.

joint angles using relative orientations for links and show proofof-concept demonstrations with a large soft robot in a real-world
environment. In Section V, we describe our method for kinematic calibration and show that the method results in 2–3 cm of
error for end effector estimation by performing this calibration
for a soft-robot arm that is 1.1 m long. We also demonstrate that
any kind of kinematic calibration will likely degrade with time
or system use, requiring additional calibration over time. Our
calibration method differs from more traditional methods due to
its recursive dependence of the joint-angle estimation method
described in Section IV. Finally, in Section VI, we show that by
introducing a hybrid control method that uses our joint-angle
estimation coupled with a servoing method wrapped around a
joint-angle controller from previous work [1], we can reduce end
effector error by an order of magnitude and control a soft-robot
end effector to within 3 mm of a desired position.
II. BACKGROUND
A. Related Work
1) Soft-Robot Joint-Angle Estimation: Rigid robots have
well-defined joint axes about which rotation occurs. Encoders
or other rotational sensors can therefore be placed to measure
the rotation of these joints. However, for fabric-based and other
soft robots, there are no well-defined joint axes, and buckling at
the joints may happen about any axis depending on configuration and load. Additionally, the task of attaching a sensor to a
soft robot in a precise and repeatable way is nontrivial.
Sensors used in configuration estimation of soft robots and
humans include fiber-optic sensors [2], flexible angular sensors [3], conductive fiber sensors [4], inductance sensors [5],
and flex-bend sensors [6]. A comprehensive review of low-cost
sensors used in the similar domain of human configuration estimation can be found in [7]. In our application, we used either
a motion capture system (MOCAP), inertial measurement units
(IMUs), or HTC Vive virtual reality trackers to obtain the orientation of each link and then used that information to estimate the
joint angles of the robot as outlined in Section IV-A. The HTC
Vive system includes two main base stations that are placed
at opposite ends of the workspace and used for tracking with
timed infrared pulses at 60 pulses per second. Trackers attached
to our robots, weighing a few hundred grams, sense the infrared
pulses and combine this with data from their on-board IMUs to
localize and estimate pose. Fig. 1 shows some of these trackers
attached to one of our soft robots. The authors of [8] compared
the effectiveness of IMUs and MOCAP systems to estimate the

89

joint angles when performing human gait studies. Also, the authors of [9] use IMUs on a human and robot arm to estimate
the angles. Their use of the IMUs focuses on integrating the
dynamics from the IMU data. We use the IMUs (and other measurement systems) to find the orientations of the respective links
and use those orientations to estimate joint angles as described
in Section IV. Although much of the math has been used in inverse kinematic (IK) algorithms, to our knowledge, the methods
described in Section IV have not been used to estimate robot
joint configurations as described in this paper.
2) Soft-Robot Kinematics: Kinematics of robots with flexibility in the links and joints is the topic of a large body of
research. One research focus in this area has been the modeling
of lightweight or long links that move quickly, causing appreciable bending and torsion in the links. In [10], an extra matrix
term is appended to each transformation between links that expresses the resistance to bending, compression, and torsion as
well as the forces and moments in every direction. There has
also been significant work in the kinematic modeling of flexible
continuum robots. These types of robots are most often modeled
as having sections of constant curvature [11]–[13]. In [14], the
authors develop two kinematic models for a soft robot using
cables for actuation.
While the kinematic models obtained by continuum and curvature models may be necessary in cases where the deformation
of the soft robot joint is not about a single stationary axis, we
modeled our soft robots using traditional rotary joints and rigid
links. Although the deformation of fabric-based soft-robot links
is non-negligible, it is very difficult to predict because of buckling behavior of the fabric. Preliminary tests also showed that
the specific joint structure and actuation method used in our soft
robots were modeled just as well by pin joints as by continuous
curvature joints in terms of kinematic error. The selection of the
rigid link and rotary pin joint model also allows us to take advantage of the tools and dynamic models already available for
serial manipulators. These tools, although not specific to soft
robots, still describe dynamic and kinematic behavior to a reasonable degree of accuracy. Even though our application used a
rotary joint kinematic parameterization, the methods presented
in this paper could be extended to any other kinematic model
that can be described by relative homogeneous transformation
matrices regardless of the parameterization.
3) Soft-Robot Control: There has recently been significant
work in soft-robot control as outlined in the survey paper by
Thuruthel et al. [15]. Some of the most relevant literature is
that on task-space control. Largilliere et al. used finite element
analysis to solve for IK to successfully track a trajectory for a
small deformable robot made of silicone [16]. Others showed
promising results in task-space control of continuum arms
[17]–[21]. Kang et al. performed model-free task-space control
on their continuum robot arm using an adaptive Kalman filter
[20]. Melingui et al. used a distal supervised learning scheme
and an adaptive neural network control strategy for task-space
control on their continuum arm [21]. Wang et al. used visual
servoing for end effector position control of a soft robot [22],
[23]. Their work differs from this paper in that their feedback
and position control were both in pixel space while our experiments are in task space. Furthermore, the soft robotic platforms

Authorized licensed use limited to: Soongsil University. Downloaded on March 05,2026 at 11:58:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

90

IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON MECHATRONICS, VOL. 24, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2019

[1], [26], [27]. King Louie has two four DoF arms, each arm
measuring 1.1 m in length, and a single DoF hip joint. Kaa is a
1.5 m long 6 DoF serial manipulator.
III. SENSOR CORRESPONDENCE OPTIMIZATION

Fig. 2. King Louie with the sensors’ frames shown that were used for
joint-angle estimation with RGB axes corresponding to the X Y Z axes,
respectively.

with which we performed our experiments (see Figs. 1 and 2) are
much larger in scale (serial manipulators over 1 m long) than the
platforms in [22] and [23], with more significant gravitational
loads.
Others have used task-space servoing to reduce the error in
flexible robotic catheters [24], [25], but again, these are on a
smaller scale (both in terms of end effector speed and manipulator length) than our robotic platform. Also, the servoing algorithms used are different from ours, as we use a hybrid controller
combining model predictive control (MPC), IK, and servoing.
Thuruthel et al. specifically mention that the work in hybrid control approaches, such as doing traditional joint-angle control and
then servoing as presented in this paper, is an unexplored field
of research [15].
There has also been recent successful control of soft, inflatable robots, such as the platform used in this paper, for both
configuration and stiffness. Best et al. implemented a jointangle MPC for a serial, inflatable arm that treated each joint as
an individual inverted pendulum enabling the use of MPC by
reducing the control space and allowing for faster optimization
speeds [26]. Terry et al. extended this work by finding a tractable
method to take into account the dynamics of all the links for
MPC, while still keeping the control of each joint decoupled
[1]. Gillespie et al. implemented a simultaneous joint-angle and
stiffness controller on a single degree of freedom (DoF) inflatable robot [27]. The work presented in this paper extends this
success to accurate end effector position control for these kinds
of robots.
B. Hardware Description
In this paper, we use two soft-robot platforms called Kaa (see
Fig. 1) and King Louie (see Fig. 2) that were developed and built
by Pneubotics [28]. These platforms are fabric-based pneumatic
systems that use antagonistic actuators and are described in

For part of this paper, we used a Motion Analysis MOCAP
system with eight Kestrel cameras, capable of sub-millimeter
accuracy, for estimation or ground-truth measurements; however, this limits use of soft robots to within a motion capture
volume. An alternative approach was to use the Vive that can
work in outdoor environments. One of the challenges in using
the Vive is that the coordinate frames of MOCAP and the Vive
were not co-located to give a fair evaluation of the Vive’s performance. To compare one sensing system to the other required
that the homogeneous transformation between the two different
sensing systems be known. We designed a novel sensor correspondence optimization for this task. Others have done similar
optimizations; however, these optimizations used calibration objects like a printed square [29], a checkerboard [30], or single
bright spots [31]. Holtz et al. developed a technique to find the
extrinsic calibration of depth sensors without specific calibration objects [32]. All of these previous techniques are specific to
cameras/depth sensors. Our optimization is unique in that it is
general to any pose sensors (measuring orientation and/or position) and requires no special calibration objects. Rather, it uses
optimization over changes in pose (transformations for the same
sensors between different time steps) to find the transform between the two measurement systems. This same technique may
be useful for multisensor registration and fusion for future work
on soft-robot estimation, since precise computer-aided design
(CAD) models and sensor mounting points are not available
for most soft robots. We used King Louie to demonstrate this
technique.
A. Methods
The frames of King Louie were defined using a fixed transformation relative to MOCAP marker set frames, and it is impossible to place the Vive trackers at exactly the same location and
orientation as these frames. The end effector position used for
control was measured relative to and in terms of King Louie’s
base frame (at the abdomen in Fig. 2). So in order to obtain an
accurate end effector position from the Vive trackers, the transformation between the Vive tracker frames and the MOCAP
frames was needed.
For MOCAP, there were infrared markers that defined King
Louie’s base frame (mb ) as well as his end effector (me ). Using
these marker sets, the end effector location can be determined
relative to King Louie’s base frame as shown in (1) (where
Tmmeb depicts the homogeneous transformation expressing the
end effector frame in the base frame using the MOCAP marker
sets, and mw is the MOCAP world frame).
Tmmeb = Tmmwb Tmmew .

(1)

In order to obtain end effector feedback from the Vive trackers, we placed one Vive tracker (ve ) on the end effector (near
the MOCAP end effector marker set) and the other (vb ) on King

Authorized licensed use limited to: Soongsil University. Downloaded on March 05,2026 at 11:58:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HYATT et al.: CONFIGURATION ESTIMATION FOR ACCURATE POSITION CONTROL OF LARGE-SCALE SOFT ROBOTS

Algorithm 1: Sensor Correspondence Optimization.
1: procedure SETUP
2:
Attach a Vive tracker to a link with a MOCAP
frame.
3: procedure DATA COLLECTION
4:
for i = 1 to num. of data points desired (n) do
5:
Simultaneously collect Tvvew( i ) and Tmmew( i ) (where i
is the time step)
6:
Store the upper left 3 × 3 elements of Tvvew( i ) and
mw
Tmmew( i ) as Rvv ew( i ) and Rm
e (i)
7:
Physically cause the robot link to rotate and
translate.
8: procedure CALCULATE DELTA TRANSFORMATIONS
9:
for i = 2 to n do
v
v
10:
Tv ee((ii)−1) = Tv we ( i −1) Tvvew( i )
m

Fig. 3. Cartesian end effector position reported by the Vive and our
Cortex MOCAP system.

m

Tm ee((ii)−1) = Tm we ( i −1) Tmmew( i )

11:
12:
13:
14:
15:
16:
17:

91

v
Append Tv ee((ii)−1) to a list of delta transforms Tv
m
Append Tm ee((ii)−1) to a list of delta transforms Tm
v
Append Rv ee (( ii )−1) to a list of delta rotations Rv
m
Append Rm ee (( ii )−1) to a list of delta rotations Rm
procedure FIND Rvme e

Use the objective in (3) and an optimization library
to compute Rvme e . We used a gradient-based
Broyden-Fletcher-Goldfarb-Shanno (BFGS)
algorithm (see [33], [34]) and ran the optimization
50 times with random initial conditions to reduce the
likelihood of finding a local minimum.
18: procedure FIND Tvme e
19:
Use the objective function in (4), Rvme e , and an
optimization library to compute Tvme e (we used the
same optimizer and technique as procedure 16).
20: procedure REPEAT TO COMPUTE Tmv bb
21:
Repeat steps 1–19, but using MOCAP markers and
Vive trackers on the base rather than the end effector.

Fig. 4. X Y Z Euler angles reported by the Vive and our Cortex MOCAP
system.

minimize
x,y ,z

where
Louie’s base (near the MOCAP base marker set). Using these
Vive trackers, the end effector location relative to King Louie’s
base frame can be determined using only the Vive as shown in
(2) (where vw is the Vive world frame).
Tmmeb = Tvmb b Tvvwb Tvvew Tmv ee .

(2)

Because the Vive and MOCAP systems have no common
coordinate frames, we needed a way to find Tmv ee and Tvmb b . In
order to find these transformations, we collected data. Then, we
solved the optimizations as described by (3) and (4) as part of
Algorithm 1
minimize
φ,θ ,ψ

3 
3
n −1 


ve
(Rv (i) − Rm
Rm (i)Rvme e )2j,k
e

i=1 j =1 k =1

subject to

− π ≤ φ, θ, ψ < π

where

ve
Rm
is parameterized by XY Z
e

Euler angles φ, θ, and, ψ

(3)

3
n 


(Tv (i) − Tmv ee Tm (i)Tvme e )2j,4

i=1 j =1

Tmv ee is structured as follows:
⎡
⎤
x
ve
⎢ Rm
y⎥
e
⎢
⎥
⎣
z⎦
0 0 01

(4)

It should be noted that this optimization is general and can be
used to relate any two pose measurement systems. For example,
this same optimization has been used in our lab to relate MOCAP
and IMU measurement systems for other work.
B. Experimental Results
In order to validate our sensor correspondence optimization
with real hardware, we used the sensor correspondence optimization in Algorithm 1 to find the transformations between
the Vive trackers and MOCAP marker sets on King Louie
(Tmv ee and Tvmb b ). We then collected data while moving the arm
around to compare the end effector position reported by MOCAP in (1) and the Vive in (2). As shown in Figs. 3 and 4,
the end effector position and orientation reported by the Vive

Authorized licensed use limited to: Soongsil University. Downloaded on March 05,2026 at 11:58:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

92

IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON MECHATRONICS, VOL. 24, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2019

Fig. 5 helps to visualize the rotations assigned for joint configuration estimation. We denote the kinematic model frame for
link i as Li and the kth sensor frame as Sk . From sensor data,
we obtain the rotation from the sensor’s world frame to the Sk
frame located on link i. This is expressed as the rotation matrix
. This rotation is depicted in green in Fig. 5. The rotation
RSWorld
k
between frame Sk and the frame Li is a fixed rotation since both
frames are on the same link. This rotation (RLS ki ) is either known
from the construction of the robot or can be approximated by a
kinematic calibration. It is shown in black in Fig. 5. Combining
these rotations yields
RLWorld
= RSWorld
RLS ki
i
k
Fig. 5. Visualization of the rotations used to calculate the joint configuration. The red rotation is the rotation of interest. The black rotations
are known rotations from the approximate geometry of the robot. The
green rotations are those available from sensors. The blue rotations are
calculated from known rotations and sensor data.

(shown in blue in Fig. 5). Similarly, we can find the rotation
from the world frame to the link i + j frame. Combining these
rotations, we can obtain the rotation from the link i frame to the
link i + j frame, RLL ii + j .
)T RLWorld
RLL ii + j = (RLWorld
i
i+ j

and MOCAP systems are nearly identical. The average Cartesian discrepancy between these two measurement systems was
0.82 cm and the average Euler angle discrepancy between these
two measurement systems was 0.56◦ . This discrepancy cannot
be equated directly with error, but comes from the fact that the
sensors from the two systems (both at the end effector and at
the base of the robot) were not rigidly attached to each other
and could shift relative to each other during the data collection
process. However, these results gave us enough confidence in
the data from the Vive to treat data and experiments from Vive
and MOCAP as equivalent.
IV. JOINT CONFIGURATION ESTIMATION
In this section, we develop a general method for rotational
joint configuration estimation using rigid robot kinematic models and orientation sensors. We show examples of analytical
joint-angle estimation for two different kinematic parameterizations and sensor configurations. We implement this method on
a Baxter robot and perform experiments to compare our estimation method to ground-truth measurements from joint encoders.
Finally, we explain the application of our method to two different soft-robot platforms. We show throughout the rest of this
paper that the application of this joint configuration estimation
enables task-space control of soft robots.
A. Method
Given frames at each link, the rotation from the ith link to
the (i + j)th link is a function of the kinematic model parameters and the joint configurations between the links. Thus, by
measuring the relative rotation between the ith and (i + j)th
links from orientation sensors, the joint configurations can be
found using either analytic or numerical IK methods. While IK
is a well-studied problem, the contribution in this section is a
method to apply IK to the problem of real-time joint configuration estimation. It is important to note that the limitations of
nominal IK methods apply to the estimation methods described.

(5)

(6)

(shown in red in Fig. 5).
Since the form of this rotation is known from the kinematic
model, it is possible to solve for the joint configuration variables
using IK methods.
Below are two examples of solving for joint configurations
analytically using two different kinematic parameterizations.
The first details the solution in the case of one joint between
sensors and the Denavit-Hartenburg (DH) parameterization. The
second case describes the solution for the case of two joints
between sensors and a different kinematic parameterization.
For the case of three joints between sensors, we use numerical
instead of analytical IK methods.
1) Case 1. One Joint Between Sensors—DH Parameterization: If a DH parametrization is used for the kinematic model,

then the rotation between frames is defined as a function of two
fixed parameters (α and θ) and the joint angle (q).
The DH parameterization provides the following equations
for entries of RLL ii + 1 where this matrix is defined as in (7).
⎡
⎤
a b c
⎢
⎥
RLL ii + 1 = ⎣ d e f ⎦
(7)
g h i
a = cos (θ + q)

(8)

b = − sin (θ + q) cos (α)

(9)

c = sin (θ + q) sin (α)

(10)

d = sin (θ + q)

(11)

e = cos (θ + q) cos (α)

(12)

f = − cos (θ + q) sin (α)

(13)

There are several ways that q can be calculated from the
relations found in (8)–(13). For example
q = tan−1

d
a

− θ.

(14)

Indices b and e as well as c and f could be used similarly.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Soongsil University. Downloaded on March 05,2026 at 11:58:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HYATT et al.: CONFIGURATION ESTIMATION FOR ACCURATE POSITION CONTROL OF LARGE-SCALE SOFT ROBOTS

93

2) Case 2. Two Joints Between Sensors—Alternate Parameterization: Let the unknown joint variables between sensors be

qi and qj , where i < j. It is possible to solve for these joint variables analytically if the parameterized rotation matrix satisfies
the following criteria:
1) At least one term of RLL ji is expressed as a function of
only one of the joint variables (qi , qj ).
2) At least one term of RLL ji is expressed as a function of the
other joint variable OR both joint variables (qi , qj ).
3) Two terms of RLL ji have one term that can cancel when
one entry is divided by another.
The parameterization chosen for this example requires that
all frames are in the same orientation when all joint variables
are zero and that the Z axes are oriented down the link. RLL ii + 2
is defined by the axis the particular joint rotates about. A visual
example of this parameterization can be seen on the soft-robot
Kaa in Fig. 1.
For example, to estimate the first two joints angles of Kaa
RLL ii + 2 = Ry Rx where
⎤
⎡
1
0
0
⎥
⎢
Rx = ⎣ 0 ci si ⎦
(15)
0 −si ci
⎤
⎡
cj 0 −sj
⎥
⎢
0 ⎦
Ry = ⎣ 0 1
(16)
sj 0 cj
and so

⎡

cj
⎢
RLL ii + 1 = ⎣ 0
sj

sj si
ci
−cj si

⎤
−sj ci
⎥
si ⎦
cj ci

(17)

where si and ci are sin (qi ) and cos (qi ), respectively. Because
(17) satisfies the criteria described above, it is possible to solve
for q1 and q2
si
qi = tan−1
(18)
ci
sj
(19)
qj = tan−1 .
cj
If the criteria cannot be met for two joint variables between
sensors or if there are three joint variables between sensors, an
analytic solution may not be available. The problem of solving for joint variables given a rotation is an IK problem, so a
numerical IK solver can be used for these cases.
B. Experiments
In order to validate our joint configuration estimation method,
we implemented the method on a rigid Baxter robot that has joint
encoders and for which we have kinematic model parameters
specified by the manufacturer. We compared our joint-angle estimation to joint encoder measurements to establish the accuracy
and reliability of our method.
For the first experiment, we placed Vive sensors on Baxter’s base and first link to estimate the first joint angle through

Fig. 6. Joint estimates from encoders and from the method described
in this paper using HTC Vive for Baxter’s first three joints on his right arm
(q1 , q2 , and q3 ).

some simple motions. Joint-angle estimation was done analytically using the method described in Section IV-A1. The rootmean-square error (RMSE) for our joint configuration estimation, moving the joint through its entire workspace was 0.62◦
RMSE error with a standard deviation of 0.61◦ .
The second experiment was to place Vive sensors on Baxter’s
base and third link to estimate the first three joint angles while
performing some simple motions. Joint-angle estimation was
done numerically using a fast IK library called TRAC-IK [35].
The RMSE of all three joints (moved through their entire ranges
of motion) was 0.87◦ with a standard deviation of 0.87◦ . Results
from this experiment can be seen in Fig. 6.
While this experiment was performed with Vive sensors, it
validates the joint configuration estimation method and could
be implemented using any orientation sensor. The accuracy of
the joint estimation would be affected by the accuracy of the
orientation data of the given sensor.
C. Application to Soft Robots
The above method was used to estimate joint angles for both
King Louie and Kaa; however, ground-truth data (such as data
from encoders) was obviously not available. For King Louie, we
made use of the DH method described above in Section IV-A1
for when there was one joint between sensors and the TRACIK library to solve for the joint angles for two and three joints
between sensors.
The inputs into the IK algorithm are the rotation matrix RLL ii + j
and the DH parameterization for the specific rotations through
that rotation matrix. The output is the set of joint angles that
would achieve the given orientation from the rotation matrix.
Because of the possibility of multiple answers for a given rotation matrix, the solver was warm started with the previous
estimated joint angles, and bounds were enforced that did not
allow solutions to deviate too far from the previous estimated
joint angles.
While implementing joint-angle estimation for King Louie,
we found that there was significant twisting and buckling between the two joints in the shoulder. We modeled this as a third
passive joint between the two controllable joints and then estimated this passive joint angle. This greatly improved the quality

Authorized licensed use limited to: Soongsil University. Downloaded on March 05,2026 at 11:58:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

94

Fig. 7.

IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON MECHATRONICS, VOL. 24, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2019

Kaa demonstrating a pick-and-place task.

of our joint-angle solutions and lowered forward-kinematics error. The same approach was taken at the wrist joint. Therefore,
each arm was modeled with six joints (four active, two passive),
and one joint was modeled at the hip, which was located 15 cm
above the abdomen frame shown in Fig. 2.
In order to show that our method generalizes to multiple
robot platforms and can work in real-world environments, we
implemented the joint configuration estimation on the robot Kaa
and used it for teleoperation tasks. For Kaa, we used only Vive
sensors as we needed to operate outside and with greater accuracy than was possible with the on-board IMUs. We chose to
place Vive sensors on every second link and to use the analytical IK method with the alternate parameterization as described
in Section IV-A2. The buckling in this robot’s joints did not
warrant modeling with a passive joint. The joint-angle estimation method outlined above allowed us to effectively perform
closed-loop joint-angle control (using a PI joint-level controller)
on Kaa while mounted to the K-Rex rover at NASA Ames. We
performed the tasks of bracing, sweeping, safe human–robot
collaboration, pick and place, and purposeful impact. The video
found at https://youtu.be/JwBjxMAzqXw shows Kaa performing these tasks.
Specifically, we show Kaa performing a pick and place task
during which Kaa picks up a stone from a stone pile and drops it
in a box. This is also shown in Fig. 7. In the video, we were also
able to show bracing, where Kaa was commanded to extend
fully and lift using the second joint. Kaa was unable to lift the
stone while extended without bracing. Next Kaa lifts the stone
while bracing against the ground using the third and sixth joint
that shows the utility of a soft robot being able to brace. We also
show Kaa sweeping across the ground and knocking over a stone
pile, showing that it is robust to several unmodeled simultaneous
contacts and that Kaa could be used to make intentional fullarm contact. Kaa was able to drag a board over to a person and
safely make contact for safe human–robot collaboration, while
the person was able to safely pick up the board and work with it.
Finally, in the video, we also show Kaa perform large impacts
and still remain functional.
Our soft robots have no means of providing a ground-truth
measurement of joint angle unlike the Baxter robot, which has
joint encoders that provide a ground-truth measurement of joint
configuration. The most direct way of measuring the accuracy
of our joint-angle estimation on our soft robots, is to use it
in calculating the pose of the end effector of our robot and
compare that calculated pose with a measured pose given by

either Vive or MOCAP. However, this combines the errors in
joint-angle estimation and the kinematic model. Moreover, it is
clear that errors in the kinematic model lead to worse joint-angle
estimation. For this reason, joint-angle estimation and kinematic
calibration are very closely related tasks.
V. KINEMATIC CALIBRATION
The joint-angle estimation method described in Section IV-A
requires a kinematic model of the robot. Because most soft
robots do not have well-defined joint axes or link lengths, we
can perform a kinematic calibration to find suitable values for
the parameters of a particular kinematic model. In the case of our
inflatable robots, this calibration is useful in the case of slight
changes in robot geometry due to deflation and reinflation. As
with all robotics, small errors in the kinematic modeling of the
proximal joints can lead to larger errors in pose estimation of the
more distal links. The novel part of this kinematic calibration
is that changing the kinematic model changes the joint-angle
estimation as well. This leads to an optimization that is recursive
in nature as discussed below.
A. Methods
Kinematic calibration for robotic manipulators is a wellexplored field as can be seen in the Springer Handbook of
Robotics [10]. Kinematic calibration methods can be classified
as either open-loop, closed-loop, or screw-axis measurement
methods [36], where both closed-loop and screw-axis methods
require knowledge of joint angles to complete the calibration.
Because of the lack of ground-truth joint-angle sensing in our
soft robots, we opted to perform an open-loop calibration using a MOCAP system to measure the pose of the end effector
relative to the robot base.
The kinematic calibration begins by moving the end effector to several points in the workspace (we used approximately
50 points) and recording the link orientations and end effector
poses. After this data was collected, we used a sequential least
squares optimization (scipy SLSQP) to minimize the RMSE
for the end effector pose by changing the kinematic model parameters. We bounded the optimization to +/−30 degrees and
+/−10 cm relative to our initial guesses for angular and length
parameters, respectively. It is important to note here that by
changing kinematic parameters, both the forward kinematics
calculations and the joint-angle estimation are affected. This

Authorized licensed use limited to: Soongsil University. Downloaded on March 05,2026 at 11:58:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HYATT et al.: CONFIGURATION ESTIMATION FOR ACCURATE POSITION CONTROL OF LARGE-SCALE SOFT ROBOTS

consideration is what differentiates this kinematic calibration
from those done in traditional rigid robotics.
Our objective function used the sensor data collected over the
workspace, the kinematic model parameters, and the joint-angle
estimation algorithm outlined in Section IV-A to calculate joint
angles for each data point. Using these joint angles and the kinematic model parameters, the end effector pose was calculated.
Error at the end effector was divided into two parts that were
weighted separately: position error and orientation error.
Position error of the end effector was defined as the Euclidean
distance between the measured position and position estimated
from the forward kinematics. The orientation error of the end
effector was defined as
measured
Orientation Error = q̃forward
kinematics − q̃identity 

95

TABLE I
MEAN END EFFECTOR ERROR FOR MOCAP AND IMUS BEFORE AND
AFTER OPTIMIZATION OF DH PARAMETERS

(20)

measured
where q̃forward
kinematics is the rotation represented as a quaternion from the measured orientation to the orientation estimated
using forward kinematics and q̃identity is the identity quaternion.
The weighting factors applied to position and orientation error
were 15 and 1, respectively. This was done because the Euclidean distance was expressed in meters, while the difference
of a norm of two quaternions is always a number between 0 and
2. These weights were chosen in order to scale the optimization
space more evenly, but they could also be used to place higher
relative importance on either one or the other if desired for a
given application.

B. Experimental Results
We performed several experiments to test the validity of our
kinematic calibration and joint estimation methods as well as to
quantify the end effector pose error over the whole workspace of
the right arm of King Louie. Specifically, experiments were done
to show the effects of sensor accuracy (IMUs versus MOCAP),
reinflation, and kinematic calibration on end effector pose error
in different parts of the workspace. Experiments were done on
King Louie using a DH parameterization.
1) MOCAP versus IMUs: Two of the sensors we used for
joint estimation were MOCAP and IMUs. We quantified the
difference in forward-kinematic error using these two sensors
that represent the most accurate and least accurate sensors, respectively, with which we have worked. Data were collected
over the entire workspace using both of these sensors. Experiments were run for each sensor using both the DH parameters
measured by hand measurement and those obtained by running
our kinematic calibration. Due to the nature of our soft robots,
no CAD models exist, and hand measurements were obtained
by inflating the robot, putting the arm in the zero configuration,
and measuring the distance between the approximate mid-points
of each joint with a tape measure (assuming orthogonal joints).
The results for the average end effector pose error can be seen in
Table I, and heatmaps based on the end effector error by location
in the workspace for the optimized DH parameters can be seen
in Fig. 8.
The kinematic calibration optimization for DH parameters
significantly lowered the mean error in both the case of MOCAP (from 0.1957 m to 0.0278 m) and IMUs (from 0.2648 m

Fig. 8. Heatmaps of end effector position error for optimized DH parameters for MOCAP (on left) and IMUs (on right).

to 0.0984 m). This was 85.79% improvement for MOCAP and
62.84% improvement for IMUs. This result, coupled with servoing techniques that are explained in Section VI, enable King
Louie to be accurately controllable in task space.
The forward-kinematics error while using MOCAP to estimate link orientations is lower than that while using IMUs. This
is expected because MOCAP provides more accurate orientation data that leads to better joint-angle estimates and, therefore,
better forward kinematics. Despite having a larger mean error
over the whole workspace, the IMUs have the advantage over
MOCAP of being able to work without the need of multiple calibrated cameras. The results in Table I show that it is possible
to do joint estimation of soft robots using IMUs. This powerful
result means that soft robots will be able to operate without the
expensive measurement equipment that may only be available
in a laboratory.
Another interesting note is that during quick movements,
such as ones from the front to the rear of the workspace, the
IMU error is much larger than during slower movements. While
the MOCAP system we used can measure orientation at each
instant, the filter used on the IMUs to obtain orientation data
[37] has some lag associated with it. This can account for some
of the very large errors in the IMU estimation case, but it is not
inherent to all IMUs or orientation estimation approaches with
IMUs.
2) Reinflation: Forward-kinematics error was found to increase with deflation and reinflation of the robot because of the
changes in how components, such as bladders and air hoses
settled after reinflation. We tested by optimizing geometric parameters for the robot over its entire workspace, deflated the
robot, and reinflated it. Forward-kinematics error before and after the deflation and reinflation cycle using the same kinematic
parameters can be seen in Fig. 9.
As can be seen in the figure, the process of deflating and
reinflating the robot clearly changes the geometric parameters,
and in this case, increased the mean and standard deviation of
the error. Optimizing the geometric parameters after reinflation
decreased the mean error and standard deviation but not to the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Soongsil University. Downloaded on March 05,2026 at 11:58:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

96

IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON MECHATRONICS, VOL. 24, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2019

better than the combination of the calibration over the front and
the rear of the workspace that had a mean error of 0.0315 m.
The results from these experiments with kinematic calibrations suggest that to have a calibration that is valid over an entire
workspace, sample points for the calibration must be taken over
the entire workspace. This also shows that reasonable results
can be obtained from relatively few (50) points throughout the
workspace. This is useful if calibrations are needed frequently
as in the case of inflatable robots.
VI. SERVOING

Fig. 9. Histograms of forward-kinematics error over the whole
workspace before reinflation (red), after reinflation (blue), and after reoptimization (green).

values obtained before reinflation. This suggests that there are
certain configurations of internal bladders, hoses, etc. that result
in a better fit to a rigid body and rotary link model than other
configurations.
3) Calibration Over Different Parts of the Workspace: Due to
our platform’s nonrigid nature and the likelihood that sensors or
joints will change slightly over time, as seen in Section V-B2, it is
important to have a fast method for kinematic calibration to find
geometric parameters of the robot. As explained in Section V,
this calibration includes moving the arm to several points in
the workspace and then minimizing forward-kinematics end
effector pose error at those points. To quantify the effect of arm
positions for the calibration on forward-kinematics error, we
optimized parameters with positions from different parts of the
workspace.
The effects of performing kinematic calibrations in different parts of the workspace can be seen in Fig. 10(a)–(d). Each
figure represents the forward-kinematics error over the whole
workspace using a specific set of geometric parameters. For
Fig. 10(a), we used parameters from a calibration performed in
the front of the workspace; for Fig. 10(b), we used parameters
from a calibration performed in the rear of the workspace; for
Fig. 10(c), we used parameters from a calibration performed
over the whole workspace; and for Fig. 10(d), we used parameters from a calibration in the front of the workspace when the
end effector was in the front and used parameters from a calibration in the rear of the workspace when the end effector was
in the rear. As one may suspect, the calibrations done over the
front and rear lowered the error in the region over which they
were calibrated, but at the expense of the other region. The lowest mean error over the whole workspace was with the whole
workspace calibration. While the figures shown were compiled
with data from MOCAP, the trends are consistent with those
found in the IMU data.
The mean and median errors for each test can also be seen in
Table II. The calibration over the whole workspace performed
the best with a mean error of 0.0278 m. This actually performed

Accurate end effector control in task space using large-scale
soft robotics was the overarching goal of the work in this paper.
Given a desired position in task space, IK can be used along
with the optimized kinematic model presented in this paper
to determine the joint angles that should result in the desired
end effector position. However, this still results in some taskspace position error at the end effector due to imperfections in
the kinematic model. A common technique used in robotics to
eliminate end effector error is visual servoing. This is typically
done in pixel space; however, for this paper, we servo directly
in task space as task-space accuracy was our objective. We used
King Louie with Vive trackers as feedback.
A. Methods
Algorithm 2 shows the servoing algorithm we developed
(with end effector pose feedback from the Vive). This algorithm
is represented in the block diagram in Fig. 11. It is possible
to servo the whole distance to the desired position; however, a
quicker response is achievable by using a kinematic model to
find initial joint angles to command using IK (TRAC-IK) for the
whole arm and sending these initial joint angles to a joint-angle
controller (the model predictive controller from [1] in this case).
This speed increase is due to the fact that the joint-space control
response is quicker than the task-space servoing response. Once
the joint angles are within an error tolerance of the commanded
joint angles (the check steady state block in Fig. 11), the actual end effector position is measured and delta joint angles
are calculated and added to the previous joint-angle command.
These new angles are sent to the same joint-angle controller.
This servoing approach plays the role of a task-space integrator
because delta joint angles are continuously being added to the
commanded joint angles when there is task-space error.
B. Experimental Results
In order to validate our servoing algorithm on real hardware,
we chose several reachable positions in King Louie’s workspace
and implemented Algorithm 2. The time response for one
of the positions is shown in Fig. 12. Using this servoing
method, we were able to drive the Cartesian error between the
desired and actual end effector position to 2.2 mm. Results
for the other positions were comparable as demonstrated in
https://youtu.be/BTCRr63bpeM, where we control to multiple
positions set by a Vive tracker held by the user. The overshoot
for the example shown was 19.4%, 16.5%, and 2.5% for x, y,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Soongsil University. Downloaded on March 05,2026 at 11:58:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HYATT et al.: CONFIGURATION ESTIMATION FOR ACCURATE POSITION CONTROL OF LARGE-SCALE SOFT ROBOTS

97

Fig. 10. Forward-kinematics error over the whole workspace using MOCAP for joint-angle estimation and ground-truth position and orientation
of the end effector. The geometric parameters used for forward kinematics were obtained from a kinematic calibration over (a) the front of the
workspace, (b) the rear of the workspace, (c) the whole workspace, and (d) both the front and rear of the workspace.
TABLE II
MEAN AND MEDIAN END EFFECTOR ERROR FOR VARIOUS KINEMATIC
CALIBRATIONS

Algorithm 2: Vive Servoing.
1: procedure CHOOSE REACHABLE DESIRED POSITION
(xdes )
2: procedure CALCULATE THE JOINT ANGLES (qdes ) THAT
MAP TO xdes USING TRAC-IK [35]
3: procedure SERVO TO ELIMINATE REMAINING TASK-SPACE
ERROR Δx
4:
Store qdes as qcmd
5:
Send qcmd to a joint-space controller
6:
Wait for the joint angles to be within a desired error
tolerance of qcmd
7:
for Δx < error tolerance do
8:
Send qcmd to a joint-space controller
9:
Pull actual end effector position xact from Vive
10:
Calculate Δx = xdes − xact
11:
Calculate the Jacobian (JA ) using sympybotics
(a python robotics library) [38]
12:
Calculate a small joint-angle movement in the
correct direction (Δq) using a numerical IK
approximation
Δq = Kq [(JA )T Kp Δx − (JA )T Kd Δẋ]
where Kp and Kd are diagonal 3 × 3 gain
matrices that determine Δq and Kq is a 4 × 4
diagonal matrix that determines the weight on
each joint
13:
Calculate a new commanded joint angle to send
to the joint-space controller qcmd (tk +1 ) =
qcmd (tk ) + Δq

and z, respectively. The x, y, and z 95% settling times were 4.90,
10.71, and 9.37 s, respectively. The overshoot is largely affected
by the accuracy of the kinematic model and is hardly affected
by tuning the servoing controller, since the initial response is
the joint-angle controller response where initial joint angles are
calculated using IK. The settling time was reduced by tuning

Fig. 11.

Control block diagram for servoing.

Fig. 12. Response of King Louie’s end effector to a desired position (xd , y d , zd ) with IK and a joint-angle controller (x, y, z) and using
Algorithm 2 (xs , y s , zs ).

Kp and Kd until the system was close to critically damped. The
steady-state Cartesian error using only joint-angle control (no
servoing) with joint angles obtained from IK using our kinematic
model was 6.7 cm. These results show that high task-space
accuracy is achievable with large-scale soft robots by using
servo-based control in combination with joint-level estimation
and control.
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Although we have shown progress in end effector control for
a multi-DoF soft robot, it is clear that there are still open questions. Future work should include the development of additional
sensors that may replace or augment the methods presented here.
In addition, although the current kinematic parameterization described in the paper was effective, it was obviously not accurate
in some cases and configurations of the arm. A large payload
in the arm would further exacerbate the errors that were already
observed (see examples of disturbance loading [39] or pick and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Soongsil University. Downloaded on March 05,2026 at 11:58:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

98

IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON MECHATRONICS, VOL. 24, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2019

place error due to unknown loads [40]). The fact that soft-robot
kinematics can be load dependent is a persistent problem. However, this could be addressed by using existing and simplified
kinematic models and then combining that approach with machine learning to compensate for the nonlinear and difficult to
model discrepancies. We have also shown in past work that given
robots with antagonistic soft joints, it is possible to vary joint
stiffness to mitigate some deflection [39] and that it is possible
to use adaptive control to improve performance for unknown
payloads [40].
The work presented in this paper on soft-robot joint estimation, kinematic calibration, and visual servoing allows improved
kinematic control for platforms whose forward kinematics may
be uncertain or may change regularly. Although we expect that
there are other sensors, estimation algorithms, and kinematic
representations that may continue to improve performance for
soft robots, we have shown methods that make large-scale softrobot manipulation feasible. More importantly, we expect that
specific themes from our approach (such as relative link orientation sensing, and needing to relearn or adapt kinematic parameters over time) will be especially useful to further improve
performance of soft robots.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Pneubotics and the NASA
Intelligent Robotics Group for collaboration in regards to results
with the soft robot platform Kaa.
REFERENCES
[1] J. S. Terry, L. Rupert, and M. D. Killpack, “Comparison of linearized
dynamic robot manipulator models for model predictive control,” in Proc.
IEEE-RAS 17th Int. Conf. Humanoid Robot., 2017, pp. 205–212.
[2] M. Donno, E. Palange, F. Di Nicola, G. Bucci, and F. Ciancetta, “A
new flexible optical fiber goniometer for dynamic angular measurements:
Application to human joint movement monitoring,” IEEE Trans. Instrum.
Meas., vol. 57, no. 8, pp. 1614–1620, Aug. 2008.
[3] R. Roduit, P.-A. Besse, and J.-P. Micallef, “Flexible angular sensor [and
biomechanical application],” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 47, no. 4,
pp. 1020–1022, Aug. 1998.
[4] P. T. Gibbs and H. H. Asada, “Wearable conductive fiber sensors for multiaxis human joint angle measurements,” J. NeuroEng. Rehab., vol. 2, no. 1,
2005, Art. no. 7.
[5] W. Felt, M. Suen, and C. D. Remy, “Sensing the motion of bellows through
changes in mutual inductance,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots
Syst., Oct. 2016, pp. 5252–5257.
[6] G. Gerboni, A. Diodato, G. Ciuti, M. Cianchetti, and A. Menciassi,
“Feedback control of soft robot actuators via commercial flex bend sensors,” IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron., vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 1881–1888,
Aug. 2017.
[7] E. Szelitzky, J. Kuklyte, D. Mândru, and N. O. Connor, “Low cost angular displacement sensors for biomechanical applications—a review,” J.
Biomed. Eng. Technol., vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 21–28, 2014.
[8] T. Seel, J. Raisch, and T. Schauer, “IMU-based joint angle measurement
for gait analysis,” Sensors, vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 6891–6909, 2014.
[9] M. El-Gohary and J. McNames, “Human joint angle estimation with inertial sensors and validation with a robot arm,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 62, no. 7, pp. 1759–1767, Jul. 2015.
[10] B. Siciliano and O. Khatib, Springer Handbook of Robotics. New York,
NY, USA: Springer, 2016.
[11] T. George Thuruthel, Y. Ansari, E. Falotico, and C. Laschi, “Control
strategies for soft robotic manipulators: A survey,” Soft Robot., vol. 5,
no. 2, pp. 149–163, 2018.
[12] B. A. Jones and I. D. Walker, “Kinematics for multisection continuum
robots,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 43–55, Feb. 2006.

[13] R. J. Webster and B. A. Jones, “Design and kinematic modeling of constant
curvature continuum robots: A review,” Int. J. Robot. Res., vol. 29, no. 13,
pp. 1661–1683, 2010.
[14] R. Qi, A. Khajepour, W. W. Melek, T. L. Lam, and Y. Xu, “Design,
kinematics, and control of a multijoint soft inflatable arm for human-safe
interaction,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 594–609, Jun. 2017.
[15] T. George Thuruthel, Y. Ansari, E. Falotico, and C. Laschi, “Control
strategies for soft robotic manipulators: A survey,” Soft Robot., vol. 5,
no. 2, pp. 149–163, 2018.
[16] F. Largilliere, V. Verona, E. Coevoet, M. Sanz-Lopez, J. Dequidt, and C.
Duriez, “Real-time control of soft-robots using asynchronous finite element modeling,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., 2015, pp. 2550–
2555.
[17] A. D. Kapadia, K. E. Fry, and I. D. Walker, “Empirical investigation
of closed-loop control of extensible continuum manipulators,” in Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., 2014, pp. 329–335.
[18] A. Bajo, R. E. Goldman, and N. Simaan, “Configuration and joint feedback
for enhanced performance of multi-segment continuum robots,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., 2011, pp. 2905–2912.
[19] M. C. Yip and D. B. Camarillo, “Model-less feedback control of continuum
manipulators in constrained environments,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 30,
no. 4, pp. 880–889, Aug. 2014.
[20] M. Li, R. Kang, D. T. Branson, and J. S. Dai, “Model-free control for
continuum robots based on an adaptive kalman filter,” IEEE/ASME Trans.
Mechatron., vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 286–297, Feb. 2018.
[21] A. Melingui, O. Lakhal, B. Daachi, J. B. Mbede, and R. Merzouki,
“Adaptive neural network control of a compact bionic handling arm,”
IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron., vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 2862–2875, Dec. 2015.
[22] H. Wang, B. Yang, Y. Liu, W. Chen, X. Liang, and R. Pfeifer, “Visual servoing of soft robot manipulator in constrained environments with an adaptive
controller,” IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 41–50, Feb.
2017.
[23] H. Wang, W. Chen, X. Yu, T. Deng, X. Wang, and R. Pfeifer, “Visual servo
control of cable-driven soft robotic manipulator,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., 2013, pp. 57–62.
[24] R. S. Penning, J. Jung, N. J. Ferrier, and M. R. Zinn, “An evaluation of
closed-loop control options for continuum manipulators,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., 2012, pp. 5392–5397.
[25] D. B. Camarillo, C. R. Carlson, and J. K. Salisbury, “Task-space control
of continuum manipulators with coupled tendon drive,” in Experimental Robotics. Springer Tracts in Advanced Robotics, vol. 54, O. Khatib,
V. Kumar, G.J., Pappas, Eds. New York, NY, USA: Springer, 2009,
pp. 271–280.
[26] C. M. Best, M. T. Gillespie, P. Hyatt, L. Rupert, V. Sherrod, and M.
D. Killpack, “Model predictive control for pneumatically actuated soft
robots,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Mag., vol. 2, no. 9, p. 31, 2016.
[27] M. T. Gillespie, C. M. Best, and M. D. Killpack, “Simultaneous position
and stiffness control for an inflatable soft robot,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robot. Autom., 2016, pp. 1095–1101.
[28] “Pneubotics
“soft”
robots.”
2017.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.pneubotics.com/
[29] H. Kato and M. Billinghurst, “Marker tracking and HMD calibration for a
video-based augmented reality conferencing system,” in Proc. 2nd IEEE
ACM Int. Workshop Augmented Reality, 1999, pp. 85–94.
[30] Z. Zhang, “A flexible new technique for camera calibration,” IEEE Trans.
Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 22, no. 11, pp. 1330–1334, Nov. 2000.
[31] T. Svoboda, D. Martinec, and T. Pajdla, “A convenient multicamera selfcalibration for virtual environments,” Presence: Teleoperators Virtual Environ., vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 407–422, 2005.
[32] J. Holtz and J. Biswas, “Automatic extrinsic calibration of depth sensors
with ambiguous environments and restricted motion,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ
Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., 2017, pp. 2235–2240.
[33] E. Jones, T. Oliphant, P. Peterson et al., “SciPy: Open source scientific
tools for Python,” 2001, [Online]. Available: http://www.scipy.org/
[34] J. Nocedal and S. J. Wright, Numerical Optimization. New York, NY,
USA: Springer-Verlag, 2006.
[35] P. Beeson and B. Ames, “TRAC-IK: An open-source library for improved
solving of generic inverse kinematics,” in Proc. IEEE-RAS Int. Conf.
Humanoid Robots, 2015, vol. 2015, pp. 928–935.
[36] J. M. Hollerbach and C. W. Wampler, “The calibration index and taxonomy
for robot kinematic calibration methods,” Int. J. Robot. Res., vol. 15, no. 6,
pp. 573–591, 1996.
[37] S. O. Madgwick, A. J. Harrison, and R. Vaidyanathan, “Estimation of
IMU and MARG orientation using a gradient descent algorithm,” in IEEE
Int. Conf. Rehab. Robot., 2011, pp. 1–7.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Soongsil University. Downloaded on March 05,2026 at 11:58:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HYATT et al.: CONFIGURATION ESTIMATION FOR ACCURATE POSITION CONTROL OF LARGE-SCALE SOFT ROBOTS

[38] C. A. D. Sousa, “Dynamic model identification of robot manipulators: Solving the physical feasibility problem,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept.
Physics, Univ. Coimbra, Sep. 2014.
[39] C. M. Best, “Position and stiffness control of inflatable robotic links
using rotary pneumatic actuation,” M.S. thesis, Mech. Eng., Ira A. Fulton
College Eng. Technol., Provo, UT, USA, 2016.
[40] J. S. Terry, “Adaptive control for inflatable soft robotic manipulators with
unknown payloads,” M.S. thesis, Mech. Eng., Ira A. Fulton College Eng.
Technol., Provo, UT, USA, 2018.

99

Levi Rupert received the B.S. degree in mechanical engineering from Brigham Young University, Provo, UT, USA, in 2013, where he is
currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in
mechanical engineering at the Robotics and Dynamics Lab.
Much of his work has been developing dynamic models and controls for soft pneumatic
robots. He is currently developing soft robotic
metrics to enable effective evaluation, design,
and development of soft robots.

Phillip Hyatt received the B.S. degree in mechanical engineering in 2016 from Brigham
Young University, Provo, UT, USA, where is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in mechanical engineering.
He has authored/coauthored several papers
on low-level compliant robot control.

Dustan Kraus received the B.S. degree in
mechanical engineering in 2016 from Brigham
Young University, Provo, UT, USA, where he is
currently working toward the M.S. degree in mechanical engineering on multi-arm manipulation
using soft robots at the Robotics and Dynamics
Lab.

Vallan Sherrod received the B.S. degree in
mechanical engineering in 2016 from Brigham
Young University, Provo, UT, USA, where he is
currently working toward the M.S. degree in mechanical engineering at the Robotics and Dynamics Lab.
His current research focuses on developing
design metrics for soft quadruped robots.

Nathan Day received the B.S. degree in mechanical engineering from Brigham Young University, Provo, UT, USA, in 2016.
His current work is focuses on effective sensing methods for soft robotic applications, including tactile sensing, and joint-angle estimation.

Marc D. Killpack received the B.S. degree in
mechanical engineering from Brigham Young
University (BYU), Provo, UT, USA, in 2007, the
M.S. degree in mechanical engineering from
Georgia Tech Lorraine, Metz, France, in 2008,
the Master Pro degree from ENSAM, Metz,
France, in 2008, and the Ph.D. degree in robotics
from Georgia Tech, in 2013.
He is currently an Assistant Professor with the
Department of Mechanical Engineering, BYU.
He founded the Robotics and Dynamics Lab in
2014 (http://radlab.byu.edu).
Dr. Killpack was a recipient of the NASA Early Career Faculty Award
which enabled research on control of soft robots.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Soongsil University. Downloaded on March 05,2026 at 11:58:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

