Int. J. Human–Computer Studies 158 (2022) 102730

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

International Journal of Human - Computer Studies
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ijhcs

How Linguistic Framing Affects Factory Workers’ Initial Trust in
Collaborative Robots: The Interplay Between Anthropomorphism and
Technological Replacement
Tobias Kopp *, Marco Baumgartner, Steffen Kinkel
Institute for Learning and Innovation in Networks (ILIN), Karlsruhe University of Applied Sciences, Moltkestr. 30, 76133 Karlsruhe, Germany

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Trust
Anthropomorphism
Linguistic framing
Technological replacement
Industrial human-robot interaction
Collaborative robots

An appropriate level of human-robot trust is considered a necessary precondition for successful human-robot
interaction (HRI). With collaborative robots (cobots) entering production sites and allowing factory workers
to operate interactively, issues of human-robot trust at the workplace are gaining relevance and complexity. It is
widely believed that trust is promoted by anthropomorphisation, that is, the application of human-like mental
models to technical devices. Anthropomorphisation can be triggered by altering either the characteristics of the
robot or the mental models of the human interaction partner, for example by providing linguistically framed
descriptions of the robot. However, the research base on linguistic framing effects on anthropomorphisation and
on human-robot trust in industrial environments is scarce. This article aims to close this research gap by
investigating changes in inexperienced factory workers’ initial trust induced by linguistic framing in the run-up
to an interaction. Besides the human-likeness of the robot, the framing also addresses the human-robot relation in
order to take into account the special circumstances of cobot use in the industrial workplace. In this usage
context, cobots frequently provoke ambivalent attitudes amongst employees, who see themselves in a cooper­
ative or in a competitive relationship to the robot, depending on whether they consider the latter as com­
plementing or substituting their jobs.
The results of the pre-post online experiment presented in this article highlight the effectiveness of framing
and reveal a significant interaction effect between perceived human-likeness and cooperativeness. In particular,
human-like framing of the cobot significantly increases an employee’s trust in the cobot only when the humancobot relation is perceived as cooperative. This can be explained by different psychological reactions on the
anticipated technological replacement by either man or machine. This finding suggests that the way employees
relate to cobots represents a relevant contextual factor in the industrial workplace that moderates the effect of
anthropomorphisation on human-robot trust. Furthermore, providing information about the cobot generally
seems to foster trust, possibly resulting from an effect of imagined contact with the cobot.

1. Introduction
Whilst research in the field of human-robot interaction (HRI) has
predominantly focussed on technical aspects (Vincent et al., 2015, p. 2),
a greater emphasis has been put on human factors such as humans’
expectations towards robots and their trust in robots in the past years
(Mutlu et al., 2016, p. 1908; Xing and Marwala 2018, p. 7).
Human-robot trust is considered a key prerequisite for successful HRI
(Broadbent 2017; Charalambous et al., 2013; You and Robert 2019),
which needs to be calibrated appropriately (Parasuraman and Riley
1997). Initial trust prior to an interaction is based on humans’ mental

models of the robot (Hoff and Bashir 2015), which serve as an internal
representation of the robot’s characteristics and capabilities. Whenever
detailed and reliable information about the robot is lacking, people tend
to apply readily available and detailed mental models of human beings.
This phenomenon is called anthropomorphisation, that is, the attribu­
tion of human characteristics to non-human entities (Epley et al., 2007).
In order to analyse the determinants of anthropomorphisation of robots
most studies experimentally manipulate features of the robot, such as its
appearance or style of movement (Smith and Wiese 2016). Hence, those
studies focus on bottom-up processes, that is, on the influence of the
actual perception of the robot on higher-order cognitive abilities like

* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: tobias.kopp@h-ka.de (T. Kopp), marco.baumgartner@h-ka.de (M. Baumgartner), steffen.kinkel@h-ka.de (S. Kinkel).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhcs.2021.102730
Received 11 September 2020; Received in revised form 30 April 2021; Accepted 13 October 2021
Available online 9 November 2021
1071-5819/© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

T. Kopp et al.

International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 158 (2022) 102730

thinking of, speaking about and acting towards it. On the contrary, ef­
fects of top-down processes, such as the impact of people’s apparent
mental models on their perception of the robot are much less researched
(Coeckelbergh 2017; Groom et al., 2011; Stenzel et al., 2012a; Weis and
Wiese 2020). Linguistic framing serves as a means to activate and
modulate mental models and to induce anthropomorphisation based on
provided information about a robot within certain “structures of ex­
pectations” (Groom et al., 2011, p. 195). However, the few available
studies on linguistic framing of robots have been predominantly con­
ducted in the field of social robotics or in atypical application scenarios
(Onnasch and Roesler 2019).
In the domain of industrial HRI (iHRI), human-related factors like
trust, anthropomorphism and linguistic framing have only been treated
subordinately so far (Charalambous et al., 2016b; Müller et al., 2017;
Sheridan 2016), although some field studies underpin the relevance of
social processes at the industrial workplace (Elprama et al., 2016; Lee
et al., 2012; Obrist et al., 2011; Sauppé and Mutlu 2015). This results in
a lack of solid empirical findings within an application domain that is
gaining relevance due to the increasing commercial availability of
collaborative robots (cobots) as a special type of mostly lightweight
industrial robots. By definition, cobots are equipped with dedicated
security features that allow direct interaction and physical contact with
humans (e.g. hand-overs of work pieces or hand-guiding) without the
need for physical separation e.g. by security fences (Murashov et al.,
2016). In contrast to conventional automation, they are intended to
support instead of substitute workers (Grahn et al., 2018), e.g. by taking
over mentally or physically strenuous tasks resulting in increased job
attractiveness (cf. Kopp et al., 2021). While previously machines were
merely considered as simple tools, cobots have begun to cross the line
between machines and interactive colleagues from a phenomenological
viewpoint (Oliveira et al., 2018; Weiss et al., 2016). Despite being used
in industrial settings and predominantly being designed in a
non-anthropomorphic way, cobots possess some essential design fea­
tures that can easily make them appear human-like. These features
include their small size, their often human-like morphology with
rounded joints, the ability to interact physically, and their fluid,
human-like movements (Bartneck et al., 2005; Ferrari and Eyssel 2016;
Marquardt 2017, p. 30; Remmers 2020; Złotowski et al., 2014). These
subtle cues can be sufficient to trigger anthropomorphisation, not to
mention the available cobot models that possess anthropomorphic
design features, such as the cobots Baxter and Sawyer from manufacturer
Rethink Robotics, which are even equipped with a visual display simu­
lating a pair of eyes (Fitzpatrick et al., 2016, p. 1790; Sheridan 2016)
In this sense, cobots can be seen as hybrid robots, which are indeed
intended for flexible use in industrial application scenarios, but never­
theless might appear as “quasi-others” and “more-than-things” to
workers from a phenomenological viewpoint (Coeckelbergh 2018,
2011, 2010). In addition, employees often have ambivalent attitudes
towards cobots, as they switch between two common conflicting nar­
ratives regarding the relation to the cobot, namely the cooperative
narrative of a cobot making people’s work easier and the competitive
narrative of a cobot threatening peoples’ jobs (Meißner et al., 2020;
Oliveira et al., 2018). These two opposing depictions guide employees’
perception of the cobot, which often lies somewhere on the continuum
between these two extremes and can change rapidly dependent on the
properties of a certain cobot and on the narratives that are most salient
at a given point in time. This situation of uncertainty prepares the
ground for the influence of frames transported by language.
Employees’ perception of the cobot and their constructed relation to
the latter have relevant practical implications, particularly because fears
of being replaced by robotic technology severely impairs acceptance (El
Makrini et al., 2018; Elprama et al., 2016; Lotz et al., 2019; Maurtua
et al., 2017). Surprisingly, relational aspects and employees’ psycho­
logical reactions to the fear of being replaced have rarely been investi­
gated and incorporated into prior research (Granulo et al., 2019). Hence,
how and for what reasons employees situate themselves towards cobots

at work in a cooperative or competitive relationship often remains un­
clear (Oliveira et al., 2018). This study will first examine the effects of
linguistic framing on perceived human-likeness and cooperativeness of a
cobot and secondly the effect of these factors on production workers’
trust in a particular cobot prior to an actual interaction.
Whilst literature on anthropomorphisation suggests a positive
impact on trust (Hoff and Bashir 2015; Waytz et al., 2014), a recent
meta-analysis reveals controversial empirical results (Ötting et al.,
2020), which might be explained by moderating effects of the
human-cobot relation. As recent research indicates, emotional reactions
to technological replacement seem to depend on whether one expects to
be replaced by a person or a machine (Granulo et al., 2019). More
specifically, the idea of being replaced by another person poses a greater
threat to one’s self-worth in comparison to being replaced by a machine.
Hypothetically, this aversion against being replaced by a human could
transfer to the replacement by a robot that is represented in a
human-like manner. Hence, this might lead to reverse effects of
anthropomorphisation on trust, if employees see themselves in compe­
tition with cobots. Therefore, we assume an interaction effect between
perceived human-likeness and perceived cooperativeness of a cobot
with regard to trust changes. More specifically, we hypothesize as
follows:
H1: Human-like framing has a more positive impact on trust
compared to machine-like framing, if the relation to the robot is
perceived as cooperative.
H2: Machine-like framing has a more positive impact on trust
compared to human-like framing, if the relation to the robot is
perceived as competitive.
In contrast to similar studies, our sample consists of production
workers instead of students because the latter are expected to hold
fundamentally different mental models of robots. This is because stu­
dents usually have different prior experiences regarding technology
usage, and are not directly confronted with technological replacement.
Thereby, we avoid the typical drawback of such convenience samples in
comparable studies, which limits their external validity (Horstmann
et al., 2018; Richert et al., 2017).
The empirical results reveal that the way a cobot is linguistically
framed influences how workers perceive the cobot’s human-likeness and
how they relate to it, respectively. Furthermore, the effects of anthro­
pomorphisation on initial trust in the cobot are moderated by the
human-cobot relation. Thus, a high degree of perceived human-likeness
fosters trust only if workers consider their relationship to the cobot as
cooperative instead of competitive.
The contribution of this paper is twofold, providing both theoretical
and practical implications. From a theoretical point of view, the results
provide insights into the effectiveness of linguistic framing in an iHRI
context and into the interaction between anthropomorphisation and
perceived human-cobot relations. Thereby, the study presented in this
paper is one of the first to account for the iHRI-specific circumstances
where employees are often afraid of losing their jobs and thus relate in
different ways to the robot. This might also explain the results from
previous studies that show mixed effects of anthropomorphism. From a
practical aspect, linguistic framing could act as a powerful measure for
internal company communication capable of calibrating employees’
initial trust and so contribute to overcoming poor market penetration
due to a lack of employee acceptance (Görke et al., 2017).
2. Theoretical Background
2.1. Trust in Robots
Trust is a multifaceted construct that has been the subject of research
in many different disciplines. From a sociological perspective, trust can
be described as a necessary mechanism of complexity reduction to cope
2

T. Kopp et al.

International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 158 (2022) 102730

such as the technology acceptance model (TAM; Davis 1989) or the trust
in automation model (Lee and See 2004) rely on the theory of reasoned
action (TRA; Fishbein and Ajzen 1975). This theory assumes intentions
and actual behaviours to result from a person’s positive attitude towards
an action such as machine usage and from this person’s belief that the
action does not violate behavioural norms (Ajzen and Fishbein 1980, p.
7). Accordingly, a behavioural definition of trust by Hancock et al.,
(2011a) stating that trust is “the reliance by an agent that actions prej­
udicial to their well-being will not be undertaken by influential others”
stresses that trust is ultimately manifest in the act of reliance on a
particular system. However, whilst trust is supposed to influence
use-choice in voluntary usage contexts (Sanders et al., 2019), trust
cannot be deduced from the actual behaviour in mandatory usage con­
texts like iHRI (Meißner and Trübswetter 2018b).
For the study presented in this article, we developed a comprehen­
sive human-robot trust model, that integrates aspects of the aforemen­
tioned TRA (Fishbein and Ajzen 1975), the three-factor theory of trust
(Hancock et al., 2020; Hancock et al., 2011b), the trust in automation
model (Lee and See 2004), the three-layer model of trust (Hoff and
Bashir 2015) as well as considerations on disuse and misuse (e.g. Par­
asuraman and Riley 1997). Fig. 1 visualizes the model representing the
interdependencies of different antecedents, dimensions, and conse­
quences of trust, which will be further explicated in the following.
The trust model we developed builds upon the conceptualisation of
trust presented in the comprehensive and widely used (French et al.,
2018) three-layered trust in automation model by Hoff and Bashir
(2015). According to this model, trust can be broken down into dispo­
sitional, situational, and learned trust. Dispositional trust originates
from time-invariant personality traits and situational trust from the
given work-context such as system complexity, task difficulty or subject
matter expertise. Learned trust, however, is strongly determined by an
employee’s mental model of the robot. Mental models are dynamic in­
ternal representations of an entity’s characteristics which are continu­
ously modified by experiences and serve as a basis for actual
expectations regarding the behaviour of the represented robot (de Visser
et al., 2019; Phillips et al., 2011). Trust can be further divided into an
initial component existing prior to HRI and a dynamic component
changing with the experience accumulated in the course of a HRI (Hoff
and Bashir 2015). While initial trust stems from cognitive reasoning
based on mental models (cognitive trust), affective trust components

with the environment’s overcomplexity (Luhmann 1968/2014). Despite
the variety of definitions and conceptualisations, three characteristics of
trust seem to form common ground (French et al., 2018, p. 19): First,
trust becomes relevant in situations of uncertainty and vulnerability,
which one can tackle by either controlling the actions of another party
by the involvement of high cognitive load or by trusting the other party,
which releases cognitive capacity. If someone decides to trust another
party, this person will tend to relinquish control by relying on the other
party (Lee and See 2004). This makes sense if one considers the other
party to be trustworthy, that is, one does not expect the other party to
exploit one’s own vulnerability. Second, as the aforementioned example
illustrates, trust always involves (at least) two parties. In contrast to
interpersonal trust, which is characterised by both parties being
humans, trust in technology involves a human as a trustor and a tech­
nological system as a trustee, making trust an unidirectional process
(Hancock et al., 2020). Third, trust serves as a decision heuristic
involving uncertain expectations regarding future events. If one believes
that an agent will react in a certain way and evaluates this reaction
positively, this will lead to an attitude of trust, as seen in probably the
most widespread definition of trust in the context of automation: “the
attitude that an agent will help achieve an individual’s goals in a situ­
ation characterized by uncertainty and vulnerability” (Lee and See 2004,
p. 51). According to meta-analyses, this attitude of trust is influenced by
three general types of factors. Human-related factors refer to
time-invariant personality traits as well as situational abilities of a
person, environmental factors to the specifics of the interaction context,
and robot-related factors to the robot configuration, functionality and
design (Hancock et al., 2020; Hancock et al., 2011a). However, whilst
this basic differentiation is commonly used, Hancock et al., (2020, p. 18)
mention that the assignment of factors to one unique category is chal­
lenging, because many factors possess interactive dependencies with
others. For example, a person’s satisfaction with the robot depends on
this person’s expectations on the human-side as well as on the robot’s
performance on the robot-side. For the sake of disambiguation, we
consider human-related factors as rather persistent characteristics and
abilities, e.g. constituting one’s disposition to trust, while referring to
situationally valid mental models in order to explain the actual
perception and interpretation of a robot’s appearance and behaviour as
well as strongly experience-based proportions of trust.
Many models of acceptance and trust in the context of technology

Fig. 1. Comprehensive model of trust in robots based on previous theories and models concerning trust in automation.
3

T. Kopp et al.

International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 158 (2022) 102730

originate from spontaneous, often subconscious reactions when exposed
to a device (Bernotat et al., 2019; Gompei and Umemuro 2018) and thus,
are especially important during interaction. Before an interaction and
especially in the absence of applicable practical experiences, people tend
to base their initial trust judgements on their vague and sometimes
ill-informed mental models of robots and their expectations regarding
the robot’s capabilities and future actions (Lee et al., 2005). Those
mental models are frequently influenced by depictions in the media, by
available knowledge about humans (cf. ch. 2.2) and by information from
others, which shape the perceived trustworthiness of the robot partic­
ularly within an organizational context (Charalambous et al., 2016b;
Lee and See 2004; Wurhofer et al., 2015).
Initial trust levels determine employees’ willingness to work with a
robot and the way they interact. While disuse describes the situation, in
which people refuse to use a robot, misuse refers to the over- or un­
derestimation of the robot’s capabilities and accordingly to an inap­
propriate use of the robot, either by relying too much on it and thereby
overlooking failures (over-reliance), or by relying too little (under-reli­
ance) on it and thereby unnecessarily wasting mental capacity control­
ling the robot’s actions (Billings et al., 2012; Hancock et al., 2020; Lee
and See 2004; Lewis et al., 2018; Parasuraman and Riley 1997).
Adequate initial trust levels are crucial for enabling positive initial usage
experiences during the early interaction period, in which trust is espe­
cially vulnerable. Typically, trust develops in a non-linear way and can
be easily destroyed by negative events, which can only be compensated
for after many positive experiences (Desai et al., 2013; Flook et al.,
2019). Additionally, initial expectations also influence dynamic learned
trust, which depends on the robot’s (perceived) reliability, that is, a
congruency between an employee’s expectations and perception (Lewis
et al., 2018). In conclusion, these interdependences stress the relevance
of initial trust as a necessary yet not sufficient prerequisite for successful
HRI (Broadbent 2017; Lotz et al., 2019; Phillips et al., 2011), which
needs to be calibrated appropriately to guarantee realistic expectations
regarding the robot’s capabilities (Charalambous et al., 2016a, p. 198;
Powell and Michael 2019). Therefore, we focus on initial trust and its
influenceability by framing.

(Richert et al., 2017, p. 73).
Anthropomorphisation is essentially a psychological process that
should not be confused with anthropomorphic design, which refers to
equipping a robot with human-like features or design properties
(Lemaignan et al., 2014). However, anthropomorphic design can also
trigger the anthropomorphisation of the designed entity. Even if robots
are not intentionally designed in an anthropomorphic way, they are
prone to trigger anthropomorphisation especially due to their embodi­
ment, their human-like movements and their appearance (Bartneck
et al., 2005), so that they can be seen as an ideal object of anthro­
pomorphisation (Marquardt 2017).
One of the most influential theories explaining the determinants of
anthropomorphisation is the three-factor theory (Epley et al., 2007),
which has also been applied to robots (Złotowski et al., 2015), although
it does not explicitly consider specific robot characteristics like physical
movement (Złotowski et al., 2014). Epley et al., (2007) and Epley et al.,
(2008) define one cognitive and two motivational factors which induce
anthropomorphisation. The first determinant called elicited agent
knowledge refers to the availability and accessibility of knowledge about
humans, who know nothing better than themselves and have no
phenomenological knowledge about other entities (Wiese et al., 2017).
Since humans possess detailed and frequently applied mental models
about humans, their activation imposes a comparably low cognitive
load. Hence, anthropomorphism is grounded on egocentric simulation
inducing low cognitive load compared to the activation of seldomly
applied and less detailed mental models about machines in general or
robots in particular. The more people become familiar with robots, the
more easily this knowledge is available, which diminishes the compar­
ative advantage of low cognitive load and, thus, decreases the strength
of this trigger for anthropomorphisation (Epley et al., 2007).
However, this cognitive factor on its own fails to explain why
humans should be motivated to consider the future actions of their
interaction partners. Therefore, Epley et al., (2007) define two addi­
tional motivational factors, namely effectance motivation and sociality
motivation. The former refers to humans’ general motivation to perceive
themselves as efficacious agents. This in turn requires them to be able to
predict and master their environment, that is, to understand and explain
the behaviour of interaction partners like robots. In such cases, inductive
inferences based on the mental models of humans can help to gain “a
sense of predictability and controllability when reasoning about
nonhuman agents” (Epley et al., 2007, p. 872) and thereby satisfy
effectance motivation. Thirdly, the sociality motivation describes
humans’ basic desire to (have opportunities to) interact socially with
others (Epley et al., 2007). Although anthropomorphism seems to be
inherent in every human being, the intensity of this tendency varies from
person to person (Letheren et al., 2016; Waytz et al., 2010).
At first glance, it might seem counterintuitive to consider anthro­
pomorphisation processes in a highly functional manufacturing context
(Onnasch and Roesler 2019). However, some practical experiences and
exploratory studies suggest that anthropomorphisation also takes place
in factory environments (Lee et al., 2012; Oistad et al., 2016; Sauppé and
Mutlu 2015). Additionally, the scarce evidence should not be mis­
interpreted as a proof for the absence of anthropomorphism; the lack of
evidence could be due to people’s reluctance to admit that they attribute
human-like characteristics to robots, or due to the unconscious nature of
the anthropomorphisation processes (Złotowski et al., 2018).
Furthermore, the described triggers from the three-factor theory can
well be applied to a factory context. First, for factory workers who are
inexperienced with interactive robots (Baumgartner et al., 2020)
applying agent knowledge about humans should be highly advanta­
geous in terms of reducing cognitive load and freeing capacity for
manual work (Epley et al., 2007). Second, it can be assumed that they
are highly motivated to understand and make sense of the cobot’s
functional principles in order to judge and compare its capabilities with
their own, as exploratory research suggests (Wurhofer et al., 2015).
Furthermore, the motivation is expected to be triggered by this

2.2. Anthropomorphism
The term anthropomorphism refers to the human tendency to
anthropomorphise inanimate entities such as robots, that is, to ascribe
human characteristics to them in order to rationalise and interpret their
actions (Duffy 2003; Epley et al., 2007). In this sense, anthro­
pomorphisation is an example of an inductive reasoning process pro­
jecting the representation of the self on other entities (Airenti 2015;
Epley et al., 2008). Unsurprisingly, anthropomorphism has been subject
to much philosophical debate, since an analysis of this universal human
tendency addresses fundamental questions about the conditio humana
(Zawieska et al., 2012).
Research on anthropomorphism goes back to the seminal work of
Reeves and Nass (1998) who replicated experiments from social psy­
chology replacing one human interaction partner with some media de­
vice. Their findings resulted in the media equation theory and the
computers-are-social-actors paradigm (CASA), claiming that “people’s
responses to media are fundamentally social and natural” (Reeves and
Nass 1998, p. 251), although they do not explicitly claim that an object
has human characteristics or deserves human-like status. This weak
anthropomorphism refers to the tendency to speak about and to behave
towards an inanimate agent as if it had human characteristics whilst
explicitly refusing that it actually has. In contrast, strong anthropo­
morphism implies that people state that an entity has human charac­
teristics. However, even metaphorical anthropomorphised speech
significantly influences one’s behaviour since it evokes cognitive scripts
(Epley et al., 2007). In everyday situations, it becomes apparent when
human give their machine names as a result of emotional attachment
(Darling et al., 2015) or when people start talking to their devices
4

T. Kopp et al.

International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 158 (2022) 102730

technology’s novelty and the diversity of possible interactions which
potentially threatens their physical integrity if used inappropriately.
Third, the need for social interaction is also apparent in factories,
especially since the degree of (perceived) social isolation increases due
to more automatization and the absence of human colleagues (Elprama
et al., 2017; Weiss and Huber 2016)
It is widely acknowledged that anthropomorphism has a significantly
positive influence on trust (Hoff and Bashir 2015; Waytz et al., 2014)
and several studies assume that humans prefer human-like robots
(Onnasch and Roesler 2019; Phillips et al., 2011). Steil and Maier (2017,
p. 417) conclude that anthropomorphisation could be deliberately used
to increase employees’ trust and reduce uncertainty during robot
introduction processes in companies. However, within the research
community, there is no consensus on whether anthropomorphised ro­
bots are ultimately beneficial. While some case studies suggest that
factory workers prefer working with robots equipped with social cues
because they evoke a feeling of being buddies (El Makrini et al., 2018;
Elprama et al., 2016; Sauppé and Mutlu 2015; Stadler et al., 2013),
others found a preference for robots that look mechanical (Müller et al.,
2017) and a more positive impact on collaborative performance
(Broadbent et al., 2011). Additionally, Onnasch and Roesler (2019)
argue that anthropomorphism could undermine the robot’s functional
value and thereby raise concerns about their usefulness amongst em­
ployees. In conclusion, anthropomorphisation might only be beneficial
under specific circumstances and in some respects (Darling 2017; Hinds
et al., 2004; Ötting et al., 2020).

(observer perspective). In the observer perspective, employees prefer
their colleague to be replaced by a new human employee due to pro­
social feelings. However, when their own job is threatened, employees
prefer to be replaced by a technology due to social comparison processes
outweighing prosocial feelings. The replacement by a technology
threatens their own self-esteem less than the replacement by another
human being because their own abilities seem incommensurable to
those of a machine. From a long-term perspective, the perceived eco­
nomic threat of replacement by technology is higher in this case, since
the possibility that one’s own skills could in principle be replaced by
technology threatens the prospect of employment elsewhere. This is
without prejudice to the fact that replacement by technology is preferred
from a short-term perspective (Granulo et al., 2019), which might lead
to a preference for machine-like robots over human-like robots if they
are perceived as competing for the job. This would contradict usually
assumed positive anthropomorphisation effects on human-robot trust. In
this sense, recent findings on the psychology of technological replace­
ment are crucial with regard to formulating our research hypothesis.
Additionally, the ambiguous depiction of cobots as either job killers or
supporting devices in common narratives prepares the ground for the
effectiveness of linguistic framing.
2.4. Linguistic Framing
Language plays an important role in interpreting and constituting
human-robot relations (Coeckelbergh 2011). Robots capable of speaking
in natural language foster anthropomorphisation (Schröder and Epley
2016), especially if they refer to themselves by using the first-person
pronoun I (Nass and Brave 2007). The utterances of people speaking
with or about robots provide a rich source of data from which insights
into a person’s mental model of the robot and its relation to it can be
derived (Fischer et al., 2012; Fischer 2011). For example, if one directly
addresses the robot with second personal pronoun you and refers to it
with personal pronouns he/she instead of it, this can be interpreted as the
person constituting the robot as a quasi-other (Coeckelbergh 2011).
Linguistic framing becomes relevant whenever one person tells another
person something about a robot on the course of a person-to-person
dialogue. The information provided by the speaker activates or shapes
the listener’s mental models making them interpret information within a
certain structure of expectations (Groom et al., 2011; Kory and Klein­
berger 2014). As studies outside the field of HRI demonstrate, compar­
atively small changes in word usage describing the robot can lead to
relevant changes in the mental model and in turn the actual behaviour
(Brandstetter 2017). In that sense, framing is very much related to the
evolution of expectations with regard to a forthcoming or present HRI
and unfolds its impact within top-down processes on perception
(Edwards et al., 2019; Edwards et al., 2016). Although, framing was
found to be influential in some studies, such top-down processes are
underrepresented in scientific studies (Klapper et al., 2014; Nijssen
et al., 2019; Stenzel et al., 2012b), which more frequently rely on the
manipulation of robot design features instead of contextual factors like
mental models (Coeckelbergh 2011; Groom et al., 2011). In the
following, we present some of the few studies on linguistic framing of
robots.
Nijssen et al., (2019) revealed that framing a robot anthropomor­
phically leads to special consideration in a moral dilemma, that is, it
lowers the robot’s probability of being sacrificed. Darling et al., (2015)
and Darling (2017) demonstrated that people hesitate significantly
longer to destroy insect-like robots (“hexbugs”), when they have been
provided with a background story about these robots. However, the
effects of a personified and a neutral background story only differed
marginally. Similarly, in a virtual game context, subjects put an
anthropomorphically framed robot with the human name Kim, which
was said to have saved the participant’s life in a prior mission, signifi­
cantly less frequently in danger of being damaged than a technically
described robot (Wen et al., 2018). Additionally, Stenzel et al., (2012a)

2.3. Technological Replacement
It is essential to differentiate between trust in technologies in the
context of private use and in (more or less) mandatory use at the
workplace, at which technological devices can also be (perceived as)
threats to the current occupation (Meißner and Trübswetter 2018a;
Turja and Oksanen 2019). Usually, there is only a thin line between
perceiving a cobot as some kind of supporting colleague or as an un­
pleasant rival (Weiss et al., 2016). Such categorial uncertainties are
supposed to trigger cognitive conflicts (Wiese and Weis 2020), which are
also associated with the uncanny valley effect (Mori 1970). Ambivalent
attitudes also become apparent in large-scale studies. For instance, 70%
of EU citizens regard robots as job-killers, whilst 85% see them also as a
necessary support for heavy-duty work and 72% as beneficial for society
(European Commission 2015). Such ambiguities in conjunction with an
anthropocentric fear of technological replacement were historically also
prevalent in earlier adoption processes of industrial automation tech­
nologies (Heßler 2019, p. 52). Additionally, public media also refers
mainly to three distinct narratives of robots as either a human’s slave,
which starts to rebel, an obedient servant, or some kind of child or pet
that seeks love from its owner, which demonstrates shifts between
ontological categories (Mabry 2016). Consequently, an employee’s
tendency to trust a robot in an industrial setting is always contingent on
whether this employee believes that he/she will not be replaced or
degraded by this technology.
Currently, the psychological consequences of technological
replacement are under-researched (Granulo et al., 2019), although
ambivalent attitudes towards robots and the prevalent fear of being
replaced were found among factory workers in case studies (El Makrini
et al., 2018; Elprama et al., 2017; Lotz et al., 2019; Maurtua et al., 2017;
Wurhofer et al., 2015; You and Robert 2018). These concerns are
considered as a main barrier to cobot acceptance (Salvini et al., 2010)
and are likely to increase with robots becoming more capable and
autonomous (Złotowski et al., 2017). In a series of eleven experiments
with different samples including factory workers, Granulo et al., (2019)
investigated how employees react emotionally to being replaced either
by a new technology or by another human employee. They found this
reaction to be dependent on whose job was at risk of being replaced,
namely either their own (employee perspective) or a colleague’s job
5

T. Kopp et al.

International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 158 (2022) 102730

demonstrated that humans unconsciously co-represent actions of a ro­
botic interaction partner only when the latter is described in a
human-like manner.
Within the context of social robotics, several studies investigated
children’s reactions on differently framed social robots. When an
experimenter spoke directly with the robot (you) instead of speaking
about the robot (it) whilst introducing it to a child, the latter spoke
significantly more with the robot during the experiment and showed
more signs of social interaction (Kory and Kleinberger 2014). Addi­
tionally, further studies with children revealed subtle differences in gaze
behaviour and shyness dependent on whether a robot was framed as a
social or a machine-like agent (Kory Westlund et al., 2016). In similar
experiments, researchers found that children were able to recall more
details of stories told by a robot, when its utterances were expressive
with different intonations (Kory Westlund et al., 2017). In a further
study, the addition of a background story turned out to increase the
enjoyment during the interaction, to reinforce the perception of a rela­
tionship and to improve the ability to retell a story (Kory Westlund and
Breazeal 2019).
In other studies, researchers refer to framing in a very wide sense by
varying the actual information rather than the way the information is
formulated in their stimuli (Groom et al., 2011; Paepcke and Takayama
2010; Rueben et al., 2017). However, in the context of the present work,
we refer to framing in a narrower sense as a process of communicating
the same information with different wording (Stocké 2002, p. 23),
evoking different frames for understanding and activating different
mental models.
All of the aforementioned studies share a limited generalisability to
the context of industrial HRI, because they rely on atypical robot types
such as insect-like robots or operate in unrealistic interaction scenarios
like in a fight against aliens together with a robot (Onnasch and Roesler
2019). In order to address these shortcomings, Onnasch and Roesler
(2019) aimed at investigating framing effects in a more realistic sce­
nario. In their study, students had to build the Tower of Hanoi based on
instructions by the humanoid robot Nao, which was framed to be either
human- or machine-like. Surprisingly, the participants neither consid­
ered the anthropomorphically framed robot as more human-like nor
were they willing to donate for a later repair of the robot. The authors
explained these findings with the fact that the functional value of the
robot had probably receded due to the human-like framing. In a repli­
cation of the experiment, they therefore added a section underlining the
robot’s functional value to the framing texts. However, this did not
considerably affect judgements of human-likeness but led to a compa­
rable level of willingness to donate for both experimental groups. The
authors took this as an argument for the relevance of the functional
value and concluded that positive framing effects cannot be transferred
from non-humanoid to humanoid robots such as Nao, since they are

already represented as human-like due to their anthropomorphic design
(Onnasch and Roesler, 2019). However, the unusual hierarchical
constellation with a robot authorised to give instructions to humans and
the use of students as a sample also limit the validity of this study, so that
the empirical evidence for the existence of framing effects in the context
of realistic and practical HRI applications remains very sparse overall.
In summary, Fig. 2 demonstrates the relationships between the
theoretical constructs and explicates the underlying idea of the experi­
mental research. Linguistic framing as the experimental manipulation is
expected to trigger changes in participants’ trust levels by modifying the
mental models that represent the involved robot itself and the relation to
the robot, particularly with regard to the robot’s perceived humanlikeness (first independent variable; IV1) and its perceived coopera­
tiveness (second independent variable; IV2).
3. Method and Materials
3.1. Design and Participants
We conducted a full-factorial 2 × 2 between-subject analysis of
variance (ANOVA) with pre-post measurement and an additional control
group, which was analysed separately via t-tests and then excluded from
main analysis. Each between-subject factor had two levels and was
manipulated actively by the experimenter. Table 1 displays the four
resulting experimental groups with the number of participants randomly
assigned. Further 27 participants were in the control group.
Participants were recruited via the panel provider Toluna Germany.
They could take part in the online experiment remotely at any time using
their private computers. Screening questions ensured that participants
were currently employed in manufacturing in an operational role and
did not have previous experience with robots. A total of 180 participants
completed the online experiment during the data collection which took
place from October to December 2019. Data was cleaned of speeders,
who finished in less than half of the median completion time, as well as
straightliners, who chose the same answer options across all questions
on Likert scales with more than five items, and outliers according to box
plots. This led to a clean data set of 145 participants.
The gender distribution (51 women, 94 men) seems fairly
Table 1
Experimental conditions in the 2 × 2 design with the respective number of
participants assigned to each condition.
Perceived human-likeness
Human-like
Machine-like
Perceived cooperativeness

Cooperative
Competitive

Fig. 2. Schematic model of the research design and involved variables.
6

n = 30
n = 32

n = 27
n = 29

T. Kopp et al.

International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 158 (2022) 102730

representative for the German manufacturing industry with 27% female
and 73% male workers (German Federal Statistical Office 2020). Par­
ticipants had on average approximately 16 years of professional expe­
rience (M = 16.16; SD = 12.11) and were aged between 18 and 69 years
(M = 47.06; SD = 12.06). Since all material was in German, we recruited
only German native speakers. It took participants on average M = 12.51
minutes (SD = 6.51min) to complete the experiment.

Table 3
Examples of textual differences in materials for framing perceived coopera­
tiveness of the robot.
Hierarchy of
skills
Benefits

3.2. Materials

Impact on
working
style

One framing text was created for each level of each experimental
factor.
The texts for human-like versus machine-like framing were similar in
length with 254 and 264 words, respectively, but differed in some re­
spects, as visualised in Table 2.
The control condition’s text with 264 words was about just-in-time
production without any information about robots.
The texts for framing the relationship as cooperative versus
competitive were 143 and 161 words long, respectively. Participants
were asked to imagine that the cobot would be introduced in their
company soon and that they would have to work with it. The framing
texts also differed in some crucial respects, which are specified in
Table 3.
The topic covered in the control condition’s text with 135 words was
again just-in-time production without any information about robots.

Value

In order to check whether the experimental manipulation was
effective, we measured the human-likeness of the cobot (IV1) and the
perceived cooperativeness (IV2). For the former, we used the revised
version of the Godspeed questionnaire (originally developed by Bart­
neck et al., 2009) by Ho and MacDorman (2017). To complement
Godspeed questionnaire with an indirect measure, we used content
coding to analyse participants free-text descriptions of the cobot.
Therefore, a codebook was created, according to which two independent
raters analysed participants’ statements. Condition-specific robot names
were replaced by neutral placeholders, before the texts were given to the
raters. The ratings were based on a five–level scale ranging from
machine-like to human-like. Data from three participants had to be
Table 2
Examples of textual differences in materials for framing perceived humanlikeness of the robot. Note. Since all texts were presented in German, it was
impossible to use the impersonal pronoun it in the machine-like condition due to
language characteristics.
Human-like

Machine-like

Paul

UR-5

• needs one day per
year to rest
• is unable to speak
• waits patiently during
employees’ lunch break

• requires one day of
maintenance per year
• is not equipped with speech
output feature
• is switched to idle mode
during employees’ lunch
break
Tool:
• tasks performed with the
help of the UR-5
Object, passive voice:
• No threat of being harmed
by UR-5 due to the
programmed low maximum
speed
“the robot”

Role
(Kory Westlund et al.,
2016)
Autonomy
(Stenzel et al., 2012a)

Team member:
• tasks performed
together with Paul
Agent, active voice:
• Paul would not harm
anybody due to his
leisurely movements

Pronouns
(Coeckelbergh 2010;
Kory Westlund et al.,
2016)

“he”

Competitive relation

The robot will take over all
tasks in which it is useful for
the human
Benefits of joint human-robot
teams are emphasized
Employees were said to be
motivated by the robot to
achieve a comparable speed
and to be able to work at eye
level
Employees’ value for the
company was stressed

The robot will take over all
tasks in which the employee
has inferior skills
Benefits of robot use are
emphasized
Employees were said to feel
pressured by the robot’s
working speed and took great
efforts to compete with it
The robot’s value for the
company was stressed

removed due to meaningless text. Based on the evaluation using the
codebook, a sufficiently high interrater reliability of Krippendorff’s α =
.82 (Krippendorff 1970) was achieved. Remaining varying codings be­
tween the two coders were resolved via discussion (Müller-Benedict
1997, p. 2).
In order to measure the perceived cooperativeness of the cobot, we
created a multi-item-measure consisting of four items measured on a
seven-level semantic differential analogous to Godspeed questionnaire:
“In my opinion, due to the introduction of this robot at the workplace,
employees will be i) replaced/complemented, ii) burdened/relieved, iii)
threatened/supported, iv) more/less stressed:”
Additionally, further participant-related characteristics were
measured by typical instruments in the context of HRI in order to enrich
descriptive analysis, as described in Table 4.
As the dependent variable (DV), we used the pre-post deviation of
trust, operationalised by the Trust in Automation scale (TAS) originally
developed by Jian et al., (2000). TAS is the most frequently used vali­
dated self-assessment measure for human’s trust in automation (French
et al., 2018). It has already been used to assess human-robot trust in
several studies (Desai et al., 2013; Sanders et al., 2017) and has also been
validated in German (Pöhler et al., 2016). Due to an on-going debate in
related research about whether trust and distrust are a pair of opposites
on a one-dimensional scale or whether they represent endpoints of two
independent scales (French et al., 2018), we created two subsets of items
representing a measure for trust and for distrust each. The six items on
trust and the five items on distrust were presented in randomized order.
Because the analysis showed almost anti-proportional patterns for trust
and distrust, we will exclusively focus on the analysis of trust in favour of
intuitiveness.

3.3. Measurements

Name
(Darling et al., 2015)
Attitudes
(Baker et al., 2018)

Cooperative relation

Table 4
Operationalisation of additional participant-related characteristics for descrip­
tive analysis.
Variable

Items

Response scale

Negative attitudes towards
robots (NARS)

14 items according to
Nomura et al., 2004
(German translation by
Bartneck 2019)
‘Dealing with new
technologies is easy for
me.’
‘How intensively have
you already looked into
robots (e.g. in films,
newspaper articles or
materials on the
Internet)?’

5-level agreement scale
ranging from strongly
disagree to strongly agree
(adapted German
version according to
Rohrmann 1978)

Technology affinity
Prior knowledge
(operationalised as
previous theoretical
exposure to robot-related
information)

7

5-level intensity scale
ranging from not
intensively to very
intensively (adapted
German version
according to
Rohrmann 1978)

T. Kopp et al.

International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 158 (2022) 102730

3.4. Procedure

Table 6
Correlations between participant-specific attitudes with trust level before and
after framing.

The web-based experiment was implemented using the survey tool
LimeSurvey. A description of the experimental procedure can be found in
Table 5.

Negative attitude
Technology affinity
Prior knowledge

4. Results and Discussion

Descriptive data from additional participant-specific variables indi­
cated that participants had not looked into robots intensively (M = 2.38;
SD = 1.01). They showed a fairly high affinity to dealing with new
technologies (M = 3.54; SD = 0.90) and a moderate negative attitude
towards robots (M = 2.93; SD = 0.63). Interestingly, all three variables
correlated significantly with trust levels before and after framing, as
displayed in Table 6.
The consistently lower correlations after the experimental manipu­
lation suggest that the influence of these person-specific attitudes on
trust was overshadowed by condition-dependent framing effects.
4.2. Effectiveness of Framing
A two-sided independent t-test revealed significant differences be­
tween the two experimental groups with regard to self-assessments of
human-likeness, t(116) = 2.50, p = .014, η2 = .051 (cf. Fig. 3), as well as
with regard to results from content coding of free-text cobot de­
scriptions, t(113) = 3.37, p = .001, η2 = .091 (cf. Fig. 4). In line with
expectations, the mean value for the perceived human-likeness in the
experimental group that received the human-like framing (M = -0.45,
SD = 1.23) was significantly higher than in the experimental group that
Table 5
Experimental procedure.
Remark

1
2

Introduction to the survey
Screening questions

3
4

NARS
Introduction to cobots

5

7
8

Pre-framing trust assessment
(TAS)
Additional questions
(covariates, demographics)
Randomized group assignment
Framing texts

9

Comprehension questions

10

Manipulation checks

11

Post-framing trust assessment
(TAS)
Robot description in free-text
field
General feedback in free-text
field
Thanks for participating /
redirection to panel provider

Brief information about the study’s topic.
Check whether users are members of target
population.
Items were displayed in randomized order.
Brief introduction to cobots in general.
Information that the following experiment
focusses on a particular cobot, which will
be further described later.
Items referred to a concrete cobot and
were displayed in randomized order.
Items on technology affinity, prior
knowledge, and demographic data.
See ch. 3.1 Design and Participants.
Participants were explicitly asked to read
the texts carefully and had to stay on the
page for at least 20 seconds.
Check whether participants read the texts
carefully. False answers led to immediate
exclusion from the experiment.
See results of manipulation checks in ch.
4.2 Effectiveness of Framing.
Items referred to a concrete cobot and
were displayed in randomized order.
Participants were asked to briefly describe
the robot.
Voluntary.

6

12
13
14

r = -.34; p < .001***
r = .18; p = .030*
r = .26; p = .001***

received the machine-like framing (M = -1.02, SD = 1.22), as visualised
in Fig. 3. Overall, robots in both experimental groups were perceived as
rather machine- than human-like.
Another two-sided independent t-test revealed significant differences
between the two experimental groups regarding perceived coopera­
tiveness, t(116) = 4.28, p < .001, η2 = .136. In line with expectations,
the cooperative framing led to a significantly higher mean value for the
perceived cooperativeness (M = 1.43, SD = 1.08) than the competitive
one (M = 0.36, SD = 1.56), as shown in Fig. 5.
Overall, the statistical results reveal significant differences among
the experimental groups regarding participants’ perception of the
cobot’s human-likeness and cooperativeness, respectively. These results
suggest that the experimental manipulation, that is, providing partici­
pants with differently framed descriptions of a cobot, did successfully
affect their representation of the cobot itself and their relation to it. One
participant in the human-like framing condition put this effect in a
nutshell by stating that “the story gave [robot name] human traits for
me, and I felt really sorry for him when I thought he would be excluded
at breakfast. (…) I really like [robot name]”. However, it is challenging
to contextualise the measured impact of framing against the background
of comparable studies and derive behavioural implications, since the
results of related studies can only be compared and interpreted to a very
limited extent due to the lack of a sufficiently precise definition of
framing (Stocké 2002, p. 23). .
Although the effect sizes range from low to medium according the
rule of thumb by Cohen (1988), we consider them as a remarkable hint
for the power of framing given the following circumstances of our
experimental setup. First, the presented descriptions were approxi­
mately 410 words long, which indicates that little information might be
sufficient to considerably influence mental representations. Second, we
did not vary the information conveyed in the descriptions, but only the
way of presenting the information by changing linguistic elements of the
text. In this sense and in contrast to the majority of previous studies on
framing, we applied a so-called strict framing approach (Stocké 2002, p.
42). Third, comparably low effect sizes could stem from using the
Godspeed questionnaire which is widely used as the current
state-of-the-art measurement method but might lack sensitivity for
detecting the effects of subtle variations, since it requires participants to
conduct “far attributions” (Baker et al., 2018, p. 248) like biological
movement and mortality which might sound eerie and unrealistic in the
given industrial context. Thus, even in some studies in which a robot’s
appearance was either designed anthropomorphically or mechanically,
no differences were found in perceived human-likeness using the
Godspeed questionnaire (cf. Roesler and Onnasch 2020b).
Given the scarce literature base on the effectiveness of linguistic
framing in (industrial) HRI contexts, these findings make an important
contribution to the understanding of framing effects’ relevance in
application-oriented scenarios and reflect the manifold role of language,
which on the one hand constitutes and on the other hand represents the
mental model of the robot and the human-robot-relation (cf. Coeck­
elbergh 2011). The parallel use of a direct and an indirect measurement
method, namely the self-assessments via Godspeed and the analysis of
free-text verbal description of cobots, to assess perceived
human-likeness increases the robustness of the research results and
addresses previous demands to incorporate indirect measures (Bethel
and Murphy 2010; Stenzel et al., 2012b).

4.1. Descriptive Analysis

Step

Post-framing trust

r = -.52; p < .001***
r = .29; p < .001***
r = .34; p < .001***

Note. * p < .05, ** p < .01, *** p < .001.

All data analyses were conducted using IBM SPSS Statistics 26. If not
otherwise mentioned, data was normally distributed (Shapiro-Wilk p >
.05) with equal variances across all groups (Levene-Test p > .05). All
scales used showed sufficient internal consistency with Cronbach’s α >
.80 (Nunnally and Bernstein 2008, p. 265).

No.

Pre-framing trust

Participants were automatically rewarded
by panel provider.

8

T. Kopp et al.

International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 158 (2022) 102730

Fig. 3. Perceived human-likeness per experimental condition, as measured via Godspeed questionnaire. Note. * p < .05, ** p < .01, *** p < .001.

Fig. 4. Perceived human-likeness per experimental condition, as measured via content coding of free-text descriptions of the cobot. Note. * p < .05, ** p < .01, *** p
< .001.

Fig. 5. Perceived cooperativeness per experimental condition, as measured via own scale. Note. * p < .05, ** p < .01, *** p < .001.

Fig. 6. Trust level for experimental and control group at both times of measurement. Note. Error bars represent standard error of means. * p < .05, ** p < .01, *** p
< .001.

The remarkable effectiveness of framing calls for a theoretical
explanation. A reason for the comparably high impact of framing in the
given context could be the perceived ambiguity of cobots, which makes
it difficult for production workers to mentally categorize them, espe­
cially in light of their lack of prior experience, which was a pre-condition
for taking part in the study. This categorization problem is also debated
in the context of uncanny valley hypothesis (Mori 1970) as a possible
cause for the observed sharp decline in eeriness ratings at a certain range
of human-likeness values (Burleigh and Schoenherr 2014). Hence, we
assume that the fundamental ambiguity of cobots (Matthews et al.,
2021, p. 60) might have caused feelings of uncertainty and imposed a
high cognitive load on production workers. This perception of ambiguity

is also reflected in qualitative statements by two participants. One
participant found it “difficult (...) to predict (...) whether or not the robot
would take my job in the future” (human-like competitive condition),
while another considered cobots as “a relief in many professions (...) and
a threat to jobs" (machine-like cooperative condition). As a consequence
of a common ambiguity aversion (Stocké 2002, 37p; Ziegler 2010,
144pp.) a high motivation and readiness to identify relevant information
in order to disambiguate the situation might have arisen. In fact, framing
information could have served as an welcome “tie breaker” to solve the
categorization problem (Fagley and Miller 1987). Given the importance
of ambiguity aversion as a character trait and the increasing adoption of
cobots as a technology difficult to categorize in practice, ambiguity
9

T. Kopp et al.

International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 158 (2022) 102730

Additionally, a two-sided Welch’s t-test revealed significant differences
in trust gains between all experimental groups and the control group, t
(48,471) = 2.67, p = .010, after having excluded seven outliers with
regard to the distribution of the trust level changes.
These analyses suggest that the increases in trust in the experimental
group are at least predominantly caused by the experimental manipu­
lation. Therefore, the control group is excluded from further analyses,
which merely focus on trust evolution in the experimental groups.
Fig. 7 shows the trust levels before and after framing for all experi­
mental groups. Pre-framing trust levels correlated significantly nega­
tively with trust gains, r = -.58, p < .001, but did not differ significantly
dependent on experimental group, F(3,114) = 0.76, p = .520.
As it can be seen in Table 7, trust increased significantly in all
experimental conditions except the machine-like cooperative condition
across both times of measurement.
The observed increase in trust levels suggests that reading a
description of a cobot fosters trust regardless of the exact information
conveyed in the text. This finding could possibly be explained by the
well-known mere exposure effect (Bornstein 1989) from social psy­
chology. This effect has been argued to cause trust gains on the course of
actual interactions (Graaf et al., 2016; Müller-Abdelrazeq 2020, p. 42;
Wullenkord et al., 2016). Remarkably, prior studies also found a sig­
nificant impact of imagined contact with a robot on trust levels
(Kuchenbrandt and Eyssel 2012; Wullenkord et al., 2016; Wullenkord
and Eyssel 2019, 2014). Hence, it is suggested that one does not have to
be exposed to a robot in real-life for trust to increase. Instead, it seems to
be sufficient to imagine an interaction. Miles and Crisp (2014, p. 20)

aversion should be more intensively researched as a potential individual
precondition for the effectiveness of framing, that has been underrep­
resented in previous research (Osmont et al., 2015) .
Although we stressed the effectiveness of framing, it would be an
overestimation to believe that framing had the potential to immediately
convert a sceptical employee into an enthusiast concerning cobots.
There have also been participants that explicitly mistrusted in the
framing information and considered the cobot’s descriptions as an
intentional approach to manipulate their attitude: "He [the robot] is
portrayed sympathetically so that people see him as something positive.
In reality, he should replace man and make them superfluous" (humanlike cooperative condition). Hence, framing effects can vary individually
and it remains unclear, how changes in perception practically impact on
employees’ behaviour.
Nevertheless, our results contribute to the literature base by shed­
ding light on the effectiveness of framing at least under certain cir­
cumstances typically found in industrial settings. These circumstances
include the interaction with an ambiguous technology, a high degree of
ambiguity aversion and a lack of prior practical experiences. Overall, the
framing effects call for more careful and sensitive language use, since
even subtle cues seem to have a considerable impact, as long as there are
no other credible information sources or practical experience. The cues
are especially crucial within the communication towards inexperienced
and insecure users of modern technology and again stress that findings
from experiments with students as samples should not be uncritically
applied to a real-world factory context.
4.3. Trust Evolution

Table 7
Statistical results from paired t-tests with regard to trust levels in all experi­
mental groups.

After having found that framing served as an effective experimental
manipulation, the further analysis focussed on changes in trust levels
due to this manipulation. In order to rule out the possibility that trust
levels changed over time due to a test-retest bias, we first analysed trust
evolution within a control group, which received a text without any
information about cobots. Two paired t-test (2-sided) revealed that trust
did not change significantly over both times of measurement in the
control group, t(26) = -1.218; p = .234, whereas the mean trust levels
across all experimental groups did significantly increase, t(117) = -5.68;
p < .001. The trust evolution in both groups can be seen in Fig. 6.

Trust level

t-test

Human-like cooperative
Human-like competitive
Machine-like cooperative
Machine-like competitive

df
29
31
26
28

t
-4.94
-2.61
-1.44
-2.60

p
< .001***
.014*
.161
.015*

Note. * p < .05, ** p < .01, *** p < .001.

Fig. 7. Trust levels for all experimental groups at both times of measurement. Note. * p < .05, ** p < .01, *** p < .001.
10

Cohen’s d
.90
.46
.28
.48

T. Kopp et al.

International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 158 (2022) 102730

name this a mere imagined exposure effect. This effect might also serve
to explain the observed trust gains in our study: Whilst reading infor­
mation about the cobot itself and its introduction at the workplace,
employees might have automatically and subconsciously imagined an
interaction with the cobot, being accompanied with feelings of famil­
iarity and an increase in trust. In this sense, providing information about
a cobot has a slight and unintended side-effect on trust, which seems to
be largely independent from the framing of this information. Hence, our
results provide support for recent findings about the positive impact of
imagined contact. However, we assume that participants’ lack of prior
experience and familiarity with robots could have been a necessary
precondition for the mere imagined exposure effect occur in the
experiment.

anthropomorphisation and anthropomorphic design, very few re­
searchers have taken this factor into account. This represents a serious
flaw with regard to the external validity of research findings, because it
is widely acknowledged that the industrial sector is characterized by the
tension between frames of technology as complementing and
substituting employees, respectively, and by an existential fear amongst
employees of being replaced (Maurtua et al., 2017; You and Robert
2018). Statistical results suggest that anthropomorphisation affects trust
differently depending on how people relate to the robot and perceive its
cooperativeness. More specifically, as statistical support for H1 dem­
onstrates, human-like framing is only beneficial with regard to trust
levels if the human-cobot relation is perceived as a cooperative. How­
ever, we could not find statistical evidence for hypothesis H2. Therefore,
we cannot conclude that the machine-like framing of a cobot, which the
employee perceives as competing for its job, results in a more positive
trust change than framing this cobot as human-like.
Deriving a possible explanation for the diverging statistical results
for both hypotheses requires a closer look at the assumptions underlying
the hypotheses. The preference for a human-like cooperative cobot
compared to a machine-like cooperating cobot (H1) was motivated by
the basic assumptions from the three-factor theory of anthropomor­
phism (Epley et al., 2007), that humans expect their social needs to be
satisfied when interacting with anthropomorphised devices. The soci­
ality motivation has been identified as a particularly important factor for
anthropomorphisation in a study by Im Shin and Kim (2018). However,
we assumed that sociality motivation would be irrelevant, when con­
fronted with a competing cobot, since social interaction within
competitive relationships should be less attractive. Instead, interactions
between competitors are based on the aim to outperform the opponent.
Based on the findings by Granulo et al., (2019), we expected that in the
context of competition, a machine-like cobot is preferable, because the
idea of being outperformed by a machine threatens one’s self-worth less
than the idea of being outperformed by a human. Hence, both hypoth­
eses are justified by different factors. Possibly, the sociality motivation
which is especially relevant for H1 has a stronger effect on trust ratings
than the threat to self-worth in terms of technological versus human
replacement which has led to the formulation of H2. Thus, a potential
gap in effect sizes could have caused the differences in statistical out­
comes for H1 and H2, respectively, which calls for a replication of the
study with a larger sample size.
Additionally, one should bear in mind that the original study on the
psychology of technological replacement (cf. Granulo et al., 2019),
which made us assume the interaction effect, investigated psychological
reactions in terms of technological replacement by machines compared
to becoming substituted by a human being. However, in the study

4.4. Interplay Between Anthropomorphism and Technological
Replacement
A 2 × 2 ANOVA revealed a significant disordinal interaction effect
between perceived human-likeness and perceived cooperativeness
regarding the evolution of trust, F(1,114) = 5.40, p = .022, η2 = .045, as
shown in Fig. 8.
Fig. 9 visualizes the increase in trust per experimental group. Bon­
ferroni corrected post-hoc t-tests were carried out in order to examine
the interaction effect in more detail and to test whether trust gains
differed according to hypotheses H1 and H2. Consistent with H1, the
anthropomorphic framing of the cobot led to a significantly higher in­
crease in trust (M = 0.86, SD = 0.95) than the machine-like framing (M
= 0.24, SD = 0.87), if the relation to the cobot was perceived as coop­
erative, t(114) = 0.16, p = .023, η2 = .045. However, all further post-hoc
tests were insignificant. In particular, inconsistent with H2, trust gains
did not differ significantly between a cobot perceived as human-like (M
= 0.39, SD = 0.83) and a cobot perceived as machine-like (M = 0.63, SD
= 1.31), if the relation to the latter was perceived as competitive, t(114)
= -0.96, p = .340, η2 = .008. Thus, H2 cannot be confirmed.
In general, the statistical evidence for the expected interaction effect
highlights the context-sensitivity of anthropomorphisation effects on
trust. Recent studies have already identified the interaction context
(functional or social), the task and the task allocation between the
employee and the cobot as intervening variables, which have to be taken
into account and make the deduction of general context-independent
anthropomorphisation effects impossible (Ötting et al., 2020; Roesler
and Onnasch 2020a, p. 172). The statistical results in the study pre­
sented in this paper shed light on another contextual moderator for
anthropomorphism effects, namely the human-robot relation. Despite
the large body of literature examining the benefits and drawbacks of

Fig. 8. Increases in trust between time points of measurement for all experimental groups. Note: Error bars represent standard errors of mean.
11

T. Kopp et al.

International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 158 (2022) 102730

Fig. 9. Increases in trust levels between both times of measurement per experimental group. Note. Error bars represent standard errors of mean. * p < .05, ** p <
.01, *** p < .001.

presented in this paper, participants are threatened by a cobot in any
case. The sole difference between both conditions lies in the mental
representation of this machine, which is framed either human-like or
machine-like. Given this discrepancy in experimental setups between
the study by Granulo et al., (2019) and our study, even small effects can
be regarded as a hint for the importance of the human-cobot relation as a
moderator for anthropomorphisation effects on trust.

Table 8
Practical implications for internal strategies to successfully introduce a cobot in
a factory environment, derived from theoretical constructs and empirical
findings.
Theoretical constructs/
Empirical findings

Practical implications

Initial trust

• Be aware that trust evolution begins before actual
interaction and that initial trust levels influence first
usage experiences.
• Implement communication and trust building
strategies before cobot implementation process.
• Provide employees with information about the
cobot to foster imagined contact and early
familiarisation with HRI.
• Communicate that cobots are a means to support
staff in cooperative scenarios instead of a technology
to substitute them.
• Describe the robot in a human-like manner, if
employees consider the cobot as supporting and
cooperative.
• Take care of realistic expectations to prevent
frustration during interaction, e.g. by accurately
describing the cobot’s actual capabilities and
limitations.
• Be aware that over- and under-reliance are equally
detrimental, and trust should therefore not be
maximized but calibrated appropriately.
• Avoid unforeseen failures especially at the
beginning of HRI when trust evolution is vulnerable.

5. Practical Implications
Apart from the theoretical contributions described in the previous
chapter, the findings of the study presented in this paper also have
practical implications regarding adoption processes of cobots in com­
panies. The observed increases in trust due to providing a description
about the cobot highlight the benefits of informing employees in order to
foster technology acceptance in companies. This is also in line with
findings from previous case studies which stress that transparent topdown communication prevents the emergence of rumours that could
cause negative expectations and thereby undermine initial trust
(Wurhofer et al., 2015).
However, for a cobot introduction process, initial trust is especially
crucial because it shapes the way an employee will approach and
interact with a cobot and hence provides a frame for understanding and
evaluating first usage experiences. From an enterprise perspective, lin­
guistic framing provides an attractive and free way of increasing trust
and acceptance, without the need to adapt hardware characteristics.
However, it is essential to implement well-targeted communication
strategies that also take into account the organisational context to avoid
negative over-trust effects (Choi and Swanson 2021, p. 136). Table 8
presents an overview of key practical implications derived from the
empirical work in conjunction with the theoretical considerations pre­
sented in this paper.

Impact of imagined contact
Impact of fear of job loss
Impact of appropriate
linguistic framing

Effects of misuse and disuse
Vulnerability of trust

do not incorporate affective components, which become relevant when
physically confronted with a robot. Furthermore, another limitation of
the fictitious scenario presented in the online study is that the partici­
pants did not fear a real technological replacement and thus the pre­
sumed negative influence of fear of job loss was possibly mitigated
accordingly. Examining workers’ reactions during a real cobot intro­
duction process in their company would probably reveal a higher impact
of the perceived human-cobot relation on trust and strengthen the
observed interaction effect within the study. Hence, the insignificance of
the effect described in H2 could also be due to the fictitious scenario.
The study presented in this paper explicitly focused on initial trust
and hence, did not address questions regarding the longevity of framing
effects and the dynamic evolution of trust during an interaction. Despite
the significant practical relevance of these questions (Ahn et al., 2015;
Baden and Lecheler 2012), they have rarely been investigated in

6. Limitations and Future Research Avenues
The comparably small sample size due to the specific target popu­
lation as well as moderate effect sizes of linguistic framing led to low
statistical power of the analyses. Therefore, it remains unclear whether
the absence of statistically significant findings with regard to H2 stems
from a lack of effects in reality or from a lack of statistical power. Due to
the online setting, participants were aware that they would not physi­
cally interact with a robot during the experiment. In consequence, we
assume trust ratings to be attitude-based and limited in a sense that they
12

T. Kopp et al.

International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 158 (2022) 102730

description of a cobot, we chose a pre-post between-subject design
ensuring a sufficiently high internal validity. Additionally, we included
a control group that received a text without any reference to robots to
rule out a possible test-retest bias.
Two key contributions to research can be drawn from our work. First,
our results demonstrate that framing the cobot’s human-likeness and its
cooperativeness before an actual human-robot interaction can strongly
influence the initial trust. Our research is therefore one of the first to
encounter effects of linguistic framing at the industrial workplace by
shaping humans’ mental models of the robot itself and of the humanrobot relation. Remarkably, even short texts of around 400 words
were sufficient to significantly influence human-robot trust. The effec­
tiveness of the framing is assumed to be due to the lack of factory
workers’ prior experience with robots and the ambiguity of cobots as a
technology and the conflicting narratives about it. This raises awareness
for the potential of careful and appropriate communication strategies in
companies in terms of fostering initial trust and paving the way for
acceptance and adequate usage of cobots. Furthermore, our work sug­
gests that the mere provision of information about the cobot irrespective
of the actual content may already have a trust-increasing effect, possibly
due to a familiarisation process analogous to the well-known mere
exposure effect.
Secondly, our research provides valuable insights into the contextsensitivity of anthropomorphisation effects, as indicated by a signifi­
cant interaction effect between perceived human-likeness and cooper­
ativeness with regard to human-robot trust. Consistent with H1, our
findings suggest that human-like framing leads to a higher increase in
trust compared to machine-like framing, only if the robot is perceived as
cooperative. Thus, anthropomorphisation effects in the industrial
context are moderated by how an employee perceives his/her relation to
a cobot. Since this additional moderating variable has received only
little attention in previous research on anthropomorphism and humanrobot trust, we therefore argue to consider the varying psychological
reactions on the idea of being replaced by technology or by a human
when researching anthropomorphisation effects, since ambivalent feel­
ings towards robots and a general fear of job loss are highly prevalent in
practice.
Future studies should examine the practical and longer-term impact
of framing and trust in real-world interactions with cobots, incorpo­
rating intersubjective differences such as varying levels of prior expe­
rience and the specific human-robot relation in the industrial context.

previous studies, which points to a general lack of longitudinal
long-term study designs in the HRI context (Nam et al., 2021, p. 446).
However, even in other research contexts like communication science,
the vast majority of studies deal with the existence of framing effects in
lab studies, without evaluating their longevity beyond short-term initial
HRI scenarios (Lecheler and de Vreese, 2011, 2016). As the presented
trust model shows (cf. ch. 2.1), dynamic trust evolution during the
course of an interaction might be much more influenced by factors like
the perceived reliability of the robot. In fact, this indicates that framing
effects might quickly deteriorate over the course of an interaction due to
the availability of more salient cues about the robot and its behaviour
(Abubshait and Wiese, 2017; Lecheler and de Vreese, 2016). However,
some experimental studies could identify framing effects that lasted for
several days and thus pointed to the possibility of a cross-situational
persistence of framing effects (Dharshing et al., 2017; Lecheler and de
Vreese, 2011). The distinction between situation-specific and
cross-situational persistence calls for a more in-depth analysis of the
formation conditions of framing effects, since cross-situational persis­
tence requires changes in long-term memory (Baden and Lecheler
2012).
In the study presented in this paper, we focused on trust as a
dependent variable without explicitly reporting distrust evolution.
Overall, distrust evolution in fact showed almost anti-proportional
patterns, but turned out to be more robust against framing effects,
which could be taken as an argument for a conceptual separation of trust
and distrust. However, the small differences could also be due to inci­
dental statistical effects, especially given a significantly strong correla­
tion between trust and distrust, which at least suggest a strong
dependence between both constructs. Hence, it remains questionable
whether treating trust and distrust as separate constructs has practical
implications in real-life settings and needs further exploration in future
studies.
With regard to the scope of our study, it has to be noted that we
focused on cobots, since they are characterized by a high level of
interactivity and offer a broader variety of ways people can constitute
their relation to them. However, the results are assumed to be trans­
ferable to all kinds of robots that are designed in a way that humans tend
to anthropomorphise and perceive them as either supporting or threat­
ening with regard to their job. It could also be interesting to investigate
whether similar effects exist for other modern technologies like appli­
cations of artificial intelligence (AI), which are also said to threaten
people’s jobs, but are disembodied and thus differ substantially in their
appearance and physical interaction opportunities.
Overall, the presented results call for further investigation of the
complex interplay of anthropomorphism, technological replacement
and trust in robots overcoming the limitations of this study by imple­
menting an off-line experimental HRI with a larger sample size. Thereby,
the practical and dynamic implications of initial trust levels on actual
HRI (e.g. regarding employees’ well-being during interaction) could be
examined. Furthermore, expectations associated with different types of
human-robot relations, their qualitative aspects and consequences on
trust should be analysed in more depth, accompanied by the validation
of measurement instruments to assess the human-robot relation. Addi­
tionally, it would be interesting to further investigate the effectiveness of
linguistic framing in situations involving people with different traits and
varying prior experiences with robots.

8. Credit Author Statement
Tobias Kopp: Writing – Original Draft, Writing - Review & Editing,
Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Funding acquisition
Marco Baumgartner: Writing – Original Draft, Writing - Review &
Editing, Methodology, Visualization, Software, Resources
Steffen Kinkel: Writing - Review & Editing, Methodology, Super­
vision, Funding acquisition
Taken from:
Term

Definition

Conceptualization

Ideas; formulation or evolution of overarching research
goals and aims
Development or design of methodology; creation of
models
Programming, software development; designing computer
programs; implementation of the computer code and
supporting algorithms; testing of existing code
components
Verification, whether as a part of the activity or separate,
of the overall replication/ reproducibility of results/
experiments and other research outputs
Application of statistical, mathematical, computational, or
other formal techniques to analyze or synthesize study
data

Methodology
Software

7. Conclusion
The study presented in this paper aimed at investigating the impact
of linguistic framing on factory workers’ initial trust in a collaborative
robot. We relied on manufacturing workers with no prior practical
experience with robots as a sample to ensure high external validity. This
also allows us to derive practical implications and recommendations for
decision-makers from manufacturing companies (cf. ch. 5). In order to
measure trust before and after participants received a differently framed

Validation
Formal analysis
Investigation

(continued on next page)

13

T. Kopp et al.

International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 158 (2022) 102730

(continued )

Baumgartner, M., Kopp, T., Kinkel, S. 2020. Industrielle Mensch-Roboter-Kollaboration
in KMU: KMU unterschätzen das Potenzial der Mensch-Roboter-Interaktion. wt
WerkstattsTechnik online 110 (3), 146–150.
Bernotat, J., Eyssel, F., Sachse, J., 2019. The (Fe)male robot: how robot body shape
impacts first impressions and trust towards robots. Int. J. Soc. Robot. 85 (4), 1–13.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12369-019-00562-7.
Bethel, C.L., Murphy, R.R, 2010. Review of human studies methods in HRI and
recommendations. Int. J. Soc. Robotics 2 (4), 347–359. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s12369-010-0064-9.
Billings, D.R., Schafer, K.E., Chen, J.Y.C., Hancock, P.A, 2012. Human-robot interaction:
developing trust in robots. In: Proceedings of the Seventh Annual ACM/IEEE
International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction. ACM, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA, pp. 109–110, 05.03.2012 - 08.03.2012New York, NY.
Bornstein, R.F., 1989. Exposure and affect: overview and meta-analysis of research,
1968–1987. Psychol. Bull. 106 (2), 265–289. https://doi.org/10.1037/00332909.106.2.265.
Brandstetter, J., 2017. The Power of Robot Groups with a Focus on Persuasive and
Linguistic Cues: Dissertation. Christchurch, New Zealand.
Broadbent, E., 2017. Interactions with robots: the truths we reveal about ourselves.
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 68, 627–652. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-psych-010416043958.
Broadbent, E., Lee, Y.I., Stafford, R.Q., Kuo, I.H., MacDonald, B.A, 2011. Mental Schemas
of Robots as More Human-Like Are Associated with Higher Blood Pressure and
Negative Emotions in a Human-Robot Interaction. Int J of Soc Robotics 3 (3),
291–297. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12369-011-0096-9.
Burleigh, T.J., Schoenherr, J.R, 2014. A reappraisal of the uncanny valley: categorical
perception or frequency-based sensitization? Front. Psychol. 1488, 1–19. https://
doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2014.01488.
Charalambous, G., Fletcher, S.R., Webb, P., 2013. Human-automation collaboration in
manufacturing: identifying key implementation factors. In: Proceedings of the 11th
International Conference on Manufacturing Research (ICMR2013). Cranfield
University, UK, pp. 301–306, 19th –20th September 2013.
Charalambous, G., Fletcher, S.R., Webb, P., 2016a. Development of a Human Factors
Roadmap for the Successful Implementation of Industrial Human-Robot
Collaboration. In: Schlick, C.M., Trzcieliński, S. (Eds.), Advances in Ergonomics of
Manufacturing: Managing the Enterprise of the Future: Proceedings of the AHFE
2016 International Conference on Human Aspects of Advanced Manufacturing, July
27-31, 2016 Walt Disney World®, Florida, USA, 490. Springer International
Publishing, Cham, pp. 195–206.
Charalambous, G., Fletcher, S.R., Webb, P., 2016b. The development of a scale to
evaluate trust in industrial human-robot collaboration. Int. J. Soc. Robot. 8 (2),
193–209. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12369-015-0333-8.
Choi, H., Swanson, N., 2021. Understanding worker trust in industrial robots for
improving workplace safety. In: Nam, C.S., Lyons, J.B. (Eds.), Trust in Human-Robot
Interaction. Elsevier Academic Press, pp. 123–141.
Coeckelbergh, M., 2010. Talking to robots: on the linguistic construction of personal
human-robot relations. In: Lamers, M.H., Verbeek, F.J. (Eds.), Human-Robot
Personal Relationships: Third International Conference, HRPR 2010, Leiden, The
Netherlands, June 2020, Revised Selected Papers. Springer, pp. 126–129. Revised
Selected Papers.
Coeckelbergh, M., 2011. You, robot: on the linguistic construction of artificial others. AI
Soc. 26 (1), 61–69. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00146-010-0289-z.
Coeckelbergh, M., 2017. Language and technology: maps, bridges, and pathways. AI Soc.
32 (2), 175–189. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00146-015-0604-9.
Coeckelbergh, M., 2018. Why care about robots? Empathy, moral standing, and the
language of suffering. Kairos. J. Philosoph. Sci. 20 (1), 141–158. https://doi.org/
10.2478/kjps-2018-0007.
Cohen, J., 1988. Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences, 2nd ed. Erlbaum,
Hillsdale, NJ, p. 567. Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ.
Darling, K., 2017. Who’s Johnny? In: Lin, P., Abney, K., Jenkins, R. (Eds.),
Antropomorphic Framing in Human-Robot Interaction, Integration, and Policy.
Oxford University Press, Oxford. Robot ethics 2.0: From autonomous cars to artificial
intelligence.
Darling, K., Nandy, P., Breazeal, C.L, 2015. Empathic concern and the effect of stories in
human-robot interaction. In: 2015 24th IEEE International Symposium on Robot and
Human Interactive Communication (RO-MAN), Kobe, Japan, 2015, Piscataway, NJ.
IEEE, pp. 770–775.
Davis, F.D., 1989. Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, and user acceptance of
information technology. MIS Quarterly 13 (3), 319. https://doi.org/10.2307/
249008.
de Visser, E.J., Peeters, M.M.M., Jung, M.F., Kohn, S.C., Shaw, T.H., Pak, R., Neerincx, M.
A, 2019. Towards a theory of longitudinal trust calibration in human–robot teams.
Int. J. Soc. Robot. 8 (3), 1393. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12369-019-00596-x.
Desai, M., Kaniarasu, P., Medvedev, M., Steinfeld, A., Yanco, H., 2013. Impact of robot
failures and feedback on real-time trust. In: HRI 2013: Proceedings of the 8th ACM/
IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction, Tokyo, Japan. IEEE,
Piscataway, NJ, pp. 251–258.
Dharshing, S., Hille, S.L., Wüstenhagen, R., 2017. The Influence of Political Orientation
on the Strength and Temporal Persistence of Policy Framing Effects. Ecol. Econ. 142,
295–305. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2017.05.014.
Duffy, B.R., 2003. Anthropomorphism and the social robot. Rob. Autom. Syst. 42 (3-4),
177–190. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0921-8890(02)00374-3.
Edwards, A., Edwards, C., Westerman, D., Spence, P.R, 2019. Initial expectations,
interactions, and beyond with social robots. Comput. Hum. Behav. 90, 308–314.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2018.08.042.

Term

Resources
Data Curation

Writing - Original Draft
Writing - Review &
Editing
Visualization
Supervision
Project administration
Funding acquisition

Definition
Conducting a research and investigation process,
specifically performing the experiments, or data/evidence
collection
Provision of study materials, reagents, materials, patients,
laboratory samples, animals, instrumentation, computing
resources, or other analysis tools
Management activities to annotate (produce metadata),
scrub data and maintain research data (including software
code, where it is necessary for interpreting the data itself)
for initial use and later reuse
Preparation, creation and/or presentation of the published
work, specifically writing the initial draft (including
substantive translation)
Preparation, creation and/or presentation of the published
work by those from the original research group,
specifically critical review, commentary or revision –
including pre-or postpublication stages
Preparation, creation and/or presentation of the published
work, specifically visualization/ data presentation
Oversight and leadership responsibility for the research
activity planning and execution, including mentorship
external to the core team
Management and coordination responsibility for the
research activity planning and execution
Acquisition of the financial support for the project leading
to this publication

Reference: https://www.elsevier.com/authors/policies-and-guide
lines/credit-author-statement
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgments
This work was conducted within the research project ProBot. This
research and development project is financed with funding by the Fed­
eral Ministry of Education and Research and the European Social Fund
within the program “Future of Work” program and managed by the
Project Management Agency Karlsruhe (PTKA). The authors are
responsible for the content of this publication. We thank Tobias Kunkel
for his valuable feedback on an earlier version of this manuscript.
References
Abubshait, A., Wiese, E., 2017. You look human, but act like a machine: agent
appearance and behavior modulate different aspects of human-robot interaction.
Front. Psychol. 8 (1393), 1–12. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2017.01393.
Ahn, S.J., Fox, J., Dale, K.R., Avant, J.A., 2015. Framing virtual experiences. Commun.
Res. 42 (6), 839–863. https://doi.org/10.1177/0093650214534973.
Airenti, G., 2015. The cognitive bases of anthropomorphism: from relatedness to
empathy. Int. J. Soc. Robotics 7 (1), 117–127. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12369-0140263-x.
Ajzen, I., Fishbein, M., 1980. Understanding attitudes and predicting social behavior.
Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, p. 278.
Baden, C., Lecheler, S., 2012. Fleeting, fading, or far-reaching? A knowledge-based
model of the persistence of framing effects. Commun. Theor. 22 (4), 359–382.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-2885.2012.01413.x.
Baker, L.J., Hymel, A.M., Levin, D.T, 2018. Anthropomorphism and intentionality
improve memory for events. Discourse Processes 55 (3), 241–255. https://doi.org/
10.1080/0163853X.2016.1223517.
Bartneck, C. 2019. Negative Attitudes Towards Robots Scale (NARS) Translations. htt
p://www.bartneck.de/2019/03/11/negative-attitudes-towards-robots-scale-nars-t
ranslations/ (accessed 28 February 2020).
Bartneck, C., Kulić, D., Croft, E., Zoghbi, S., 2009. Measurement instruments for the
anthropomorphism, animacy, likeability, perceived intelligence, and perceived
safety of robots. Int. J. Soc. Robotics 1 (1), 71–81. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12369008-0001-3.
Bartneck, C., Rosalia, C., Menges, R., Deckers, I., 2005. Robot Abuse – A Limitation of the
Media Equation. In: Proceedings of the Interact 2005 Workshop on Abuse, Rome.

14

T. Kopp et al.

International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 158 (2022) 102730

Edwards, C., Edwards, A., Spence, P.R., Westerman, D., 2016. Initial interaction
expectations with robots: testing the human-to-human interaction script.
Communication Studies 67 (2), 227–238. https://doi.org/10.1080/
10510974.2015.1121899.
El Makrini, I., Elprama, S.A., van den Bergh, J., Vanderborght, B., Knevels, A.-J.,
Jewell, C.I., Stals, F., de Coppel, G., Ravyse, I., Potargent, J., Berte, J., Diericx, B.,
Waegeman, T., Jacobs, A., 2018. Working with Walt: How a Cobot Was Developed
and Inserted on an Auto Assembly Line. IEEE Robot. Automat. Mag. 25 (2), 51–58.
https://doi.org/10.1109/MRA.2018.2815947.
Elprama, S.A., El Makrini, I., Vanderborght, B., Jacobs, A., 2016. Acceptance of
collaborative robots by factory workers: a pilot study on the importance of social
cues of anthropomorphic robots. In: The 25th IEEE International Symposium on
Robot and Human Interactive Communication. New York, pp. 919–924.
Elprama, S.A., Jewell, C.I., Jacobs, A., El Makrini, I., Vanderborght, B., 2017. Attitudes of
Factory Workers towards Industrial and Collaborative Robots. In: Proceedings of the
Companion of the 2017 ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot
Interaction - HRI ’17, Vienna, Austria. 6/3/2017 - 9/3/2017. ACM Press, New York,
NY, USA, pp. 113–114.
Epley, N., Waytz, A., Akalis, S., Cacioppo, J.T, 2008. When We Need A Human:
Motivational Determinants of Anthropomorphism. Soc. Cogn. 26 (2), 143–155.
https://doi.org/10.1521/soco.2008.26.2.143.
Epley, N., Waytz, A., Cacioppo, J.T, 2007. On seeing human: a three-factor theory of
anthropomorphism. Psychol. Rev. 114 (4), 864–886. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033295X.114.4.864.
European Commission 2015. Autonomous Systems: Special Eurobarometer 427, 25 pp.
(accessed 10 August 2018).
Fagley, N., Miller, P.M, 1987. The effects of decision framing on choice of risky vs certain
options. Organ. Behav. Hum. Decis. Process. 39 (2), 264–277. https://doi.org/
10.1016/0749-5978(87)90041-0.
Ferrari, F., Eyssel, F, 2016. Toward a hybrid society. In: Agah, A., Howard, A.M.,
Salichs, M.A., He, H., Cabibihan, J.-J. (Eds.), Social Robotics: Proceedings of the 8th
International Conference, ICSR 2016, Kansas City, MO, USA, November 1–3, 2016.
Springer International Publishing, pp. 909–918. ICSR 2016 Kansas City, MO, USA,
November 1–3, 2016Cham.
Fischer, K., 2011. Interpersonal variation in understanding robots as social actors. In:
Proceedings of the 6th international conference on Human-robot interaction,
Lausanne, Switzerland. ACM, New York, NY, pp. 53–60.
Fischer, K., Lohan, K.S., Foth, K., 2012. Levels of embodiment: Linguistic Analyses of
Factors Influencing HRI. In: HRI ’12 Proceedings of the seventh annual ACM/IEEE
international conference on Human-Robot Interaction, pp. 463–470. https://doi.
org/10.1145/2157689.2157839.
Fishbein, M., Ajzen, I., 1975. Belief, Attitude, Intention And Behavior: An Introduction
To Theory And Research. Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass, p. 578.
Fitzpatrick, P., Harada, K., Kemp, C.C., Matsumoto, Y., 2016. Humanoids. In:
Siciliano, B., Khatib, O. (Eds.), Springer Handbook Of Robotics, 2nd ed. Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 1789–1818.
Flook, R., Shrinah, A., Wijnen, L., Eder, K., Melhuish, C., Lemaignan, S., 2019. Social
Cues in Robot Interaction. Trust Acceptance. IS 20 (3), 455–486. https://doi.org/
10.1075/is.18067.flo.
French, B., Duenser, A., Heathcote, A., 2018. Trust in Automation - A Literature Review
report. CSIRO, Australia. CSIRO Report EP184082.
German Federal Statistical Office, 2020. Employed persons: Germany, years, economic
sectors (WZ2008), gender. https://www-genesis.destatis.de/genesis/online?operat
ion=previous&levelindex=1&step=1&titel=Ergebnis&levelid=1595922346681&a
cceptscookies=false (accessed 28 July 2020).
Gompei, T., Umemuro, H., 2018. Factors and development of cognitive and affective
trust on social robots. In: Ge, S.S. (Ed.), Social robotics: Proceedings of the 10th
International Conference, ICSR 2018, Qingdao, China, November 28 - 30, 2018,
11357. Springer, Cham, pp. 45–54.
Görke, M., Blankemeyer, S., Pischke, D., Oubari, A., Raatz, A., Nyhuis, P., 2017. Sichere
und akzeptierte Kollaboration von Mensch und Maschine. ZWF Zeitschrift für
wirtschaftlichen Fabrikbetrieb 112 (1-2), 41–45. https://doi.org/10.3139/
104.111668.
Graaf, M.M.A., de Ben Allouch, S., van Dijk, J.A.G.M., 2016. Long-term evaluation of a
social robot in real homes. IS 17 (3), 461–490. https://doi.org/10.1075/
is.17.3.08deg.
Grahn, S., Gopinath, V., Wang, X.V., Johansen, K., 2018. Exploring a model for
production system design to utilize large robots in human-robot collaborative
assembly cells. Procedia Manufacturing 25, 612–619. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
promfg.2018.06.094.
Granulo, A., Fuchs, C., Puntoni, S., 2019. Psychological reactions to human versus
robotic job replacement. Nature Human Behaviour 3 (10), 1062–1069. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41562-019-0670-y.
Groom, V., Srinivasan, V., Bethel, C.L., Murphy, R., Dole, L., Nass, C., 2011. Responses to
robot social roles and social role framing. In: 2011 International Conference on
Collaboration Technologies and Systems (CTS). Philadelphia, PA, USA, pp. 194–203.
https://doi.org/10.1109/CTS.2011.5928687.
Hancock, P.A., Billings, D.R., Schafer, K.E, 2011a. Can you trust your robot? Ergonomics
in Design 19 (3), 24–29. https://doi.org/10.1177/1064804611415045.
Hancock, P.A., Billings, D.R., Schafer, K.E., Chen, J.Y.C., de Visser, E.J., Parasuraman, R.,
2011b. A meta-analysis of factors affecting trust in human-robot interaction. Hum.
Factors 53 (5), 517–527. https://doi.org/10.1177/0018720811417254.
Hancock, P.A., Kessler, T.T., Kaplan, A.D., Brill, J.C., Szalma, J.L. 2020. Evolving Trust in
Robots: Specification Through Sequential and Comparative Meta-Analyses. Human
factors, 18720820922080. https://doi.org/10.1177/0018720820922080.

Heßler, M., 2019. Menschen – Maschinen – MenschMaschinen in Zeit und Raum.
Perspektiven einer Historischen Technikanthropologie. In: Heßler, M., Weber, H.
(Eds.), Provokationen der Technikgeschichte: Zum Reflexionszwang historischer
Forschung. Verlag Ferdinand Schöningh, Paderborn. Verlag Ferdinand Schöningh,
Paderborn.
Hinds, P.J., Roberts, T.L., Jones, H., 2004. Whose Job Is It Anyway? A Study of HumanRobot Interaction in a Collaborative Task. Hum-Comput. Interact. (19), 151–181.
Ho, C.-C., MacDorman, K.F, 2017. Measuring the Uncanny Valley Effect. Int. J. Soc.
Robot. 9 (1), 129–139. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12369-016-0380-9.
Hoff, K.A., Bashir, M., 2015. Trust in automation: integrating empirical evidence on
factors that influence trust. Hum. Factors 57 (3), 407–434. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0018720814547570.
Horstmann, A.C., Bock, N., Linhuber, E., Szczuka, J.M., Straßmann, C., Krämer, N.C.,
2018. Do a robot’s social skills and its objection discourage interactants from
switching the robot off? PLoS One 13 (7), e0201581. https://doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pone.0201581.
Im Shin, H., Kim, J., 2018. My computer is more thoughtful than you: Loneliness,
anthropomorphism and dehumanization. Curr. Psychol. 27, 1644. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s12144-018-9975-7.
Jian, J.-Y., Bisantz, A.M., Drury, C.G, 2000. Foundations for an empirically determined
scale of trust in automated systems. Int. J. Cognit. Ergonom. 4 (1), 53–71. https://
doi.org/10.1207/S15327566IJCE0401_04.
Klapper, A., Ramsey, R., Wigboldus, D., Cross, E.S, 2014. The control of automatic
imitation based on bottom-up and top-down cues to animacy: insights from brain
and behavior. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 26 (11), 2503–2513. https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn_
a_00651.
Kopp, T., Baumgartner, M., Kinkel, S., 2021. Success factors for introducing industrial
human-robot interaction in practice: an empirically driven framework. Int. J. Adv.
Manuf. Technol. 112 (3–4), 685–704. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00170-020-063980.
Kory, J., Kleinberger, R., 2014. Social agent or machine? An exploration of how the
framing of a robot affects prosodic mimicry and expressivity. In: 2nd Workshop on
Applications for Emotional Robots held in conjunction with the 9th ACM/IEEE
International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction.
Kory Westlund, J.M., Breazeal, C.L., 2019. Exploring the effects of a social robot’s speech
entrainment and backstory on young children’s emotion, rapport, relationship, and
learning. Front. Robot. AI 6, 54. https://doi.org/10.3389/frobt.2019.00054.
Kory Westlund, J.M., Jeong, S., Park, H.W., Ronfard, S., Adhikari, A., Harris, P.L.,
DeSteno, D., Breazeal, C.L., 2017. Flat vs. Expressive storytelling: young children’s
learning and retention of a social robot’s narrative. Front. Human Neurosci. 11 295,
1–20. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2017.00295.
Kory Westlund, J.M., Martinez, M., Archie, M., Das, M., Breazeal, C.L., 2016. Effects of
Framing a Robot as a Social Agent or as a Machine on Children’s Social Behavior. In:
RO-MAN 2016: The 25th IEEE International Symposium on Robot and Human
Interactive Communication, Teachers College, Columbia University, New York, U.S.
A. August 26 to August 31, 2016. IEEE, Piscataway, NJ.
Krippendorff, K., 1970. Bivariate Agreement Coefficients for Reliability of Data.
Sociological Methodology 2, 139–150. https://doi.org/10.2307/270787.
Kuchenbrandt, D., Eyssel, F., 2012. The mental simulation of a human-robot interaction:
Positive effects on attitudes and anxiety toward robots. In: 2012 IEEE Ro-Man: The
21st IEEE International Symposium on Robot and Human Interactive
Communication, Paris, France. IEEE, pp. 463–468.
Lecheler, S., de Vreese, C.H., 2011. Getting Real: The Duration of Framing Effects.
J. Commun. 61 (5), 959–983. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1460-2466.2011.01580.x.
Lecheler, S., de Vreese, C.H., 2016. How long do news framing effects last? a systematic
review of longitudinal studies. Ann. Internat. Commun. Ass. 40 (1), 3–30. https://
doi.org/10.1080/23808985.2015.11735254.
Lee, J.D., See, K.A, 2004. Trust in automation: designing for appropriate reliance. Hum
Factors 46 (1), 50–80. https://doi.org/10.1518/hfes.46.1.50_30392.
Lee, M.K., Kiesler, S., Forlizzi, J., Rybski, P., 2012. Ripple effects of an embedded social
agent: A field study of a social robot in the workplace. In: Proceedings of the 2012
ACM annual conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’12, Austin,
Texas, USA. 05-10 May, 2012. ACM Press, New York, NY, USA, pp. 695–704.
Lee, S., Kiesler, S., Lau, I.Y., Chiu, C.-Y., 2005. Human mental models of humanoid
robots. In: 2005 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA):
Barcelona, Spain: 18-22 April, 2005. IEEE, Piscataway, N.J, pp. 2767–2772.
Lemaignan, S., Fink, J., Dillenbourg, P., Braboszcz, C. 2014. The Cognitive Correlates of
Anthropomorphism. Human-Robot Interaction Conference, Workshop "HRI: a bridge
between Robotics and Neuroscience".
Letheren, K., Kuhn, K.-A.L., Lings, I., Pope, N.K.L, 2016. Individual difference factors
related to anthropomorphic tendency. Eur. J. Mark. 50 (5/6), 973–1002. https://doi.
org/10.1108/EJM-05-2014-0291.
Lewis, M., Sycara, K., Walker, P. 2018. The Role of Trust in Human-Robot Interaction, in:
Abbass, H.A., Scholz, J., Reid, D.J. (Eds.), Foundations of Trusted Autonomy.
Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp. 135–160.
Lotz, V., Himmel, S., Ziefle, M., 2019. You’re My Mate-Acceptance Factors for HumanRobot Collaboration in Industry. In: International Conference on Competitive
Manufacturing (COMA 19), 31 January-2 February 2019, Stellenbosch, South Africa.
Department of Industrial Engineering, Stellenbosch University, Stellenbosch,
pp. 405–411.
Luhmann, N., 1968/2014. Vertrauen: Ein Mechanismus der Reduktion sozialer
Komplexität, 5th ed. UTB.
Mabry, L., 2016. The Rhetoric of Social Robots: How Consumerism is Shaping
Perceptions of Robotic Ontology. Master Thesis. Seattle, Washington, USA.

15

T. Kopp et al.

International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 158 (2022) 102730

Marquardt, M., 2017. Anthropomorphisierung in der Mensch-Roboter
Interaktionsforschung: theoretische Zugänge und soziologisches Anschlusspotential.
Working Papers - kultur- und techniksoziologische Studien 10 (1), 1–44.
Matthews, G., Panganiban, A.R., Lin, J., Long, M.D., Schwing, M., 2021. Super-machines
or sub-humans: mental models and trust in intelligent autonomous systems. In:
Nam, C.S., Lyons, J.B. (Eds.), Trust in Human-Robot Interaction. Elsevier Academic
Press, pp. 59–82.
Maurtua, I., Ibarguren, A., Kildal, J., Susperregi, L., Sierra, B., 2017. Human–robot
collaboration in industrial applications. Int. J. Adv. Rob. Syst. 14 (4), 1–10. https://
doi.org/10.1177/1729881417716010.
Meißner, A., Trübswetter, A., 2018a. Kollaborierende Roboter in der Produktion Akzeptanz durch die Beschäftigten. Betriebspraxis Arbeitsforschung (233), 24–27.
Meißner, A., Trübswetter, A., 2018b. Mensch-Roboter-Kollaboration in der Produktion:
Kritische Würdigung etablierter Technikakzeptanzmodelle und neue Erkenntnisse in
der Akzeptanzforschung. In: Weidner, R., Karafillidis, A. (Eds.), Technische
Unterstützungssysteme, die die Menschen wirklich wollen: Dritte transdisziplinäre
Konferenz. Helmut-Schmidt-Universität, Hamburg, Deutschland, pp. 223–233.
Meißner, A., Trübswetter, A., Conti-Kufner, A.S., Schmidtler, J., 2020. Friend or Foe?
Understanding Assembly Workers’ Acceptance of Human-robot Collaboration.
J. Hum.-Robot Interact. 10 (1), 1–30. https://doi.org/10.1145/3399433.
Miles, E., Crisp, R.J, 2014. A meta-analytic test of the imagined contact hypothesis.
Group Process. Intergroup Relations 17 (1), 3–26. https://doi.org/10.1177/
1368430213510573.
Mori, M., 1970. The Uncanny Valley. Energy 7, 33–35.
Müller, S.L., Schröder, S., Jeschke, S., Richert, A., 2017. Design of a robotic workmate.
In: Duffy, V.G. (Ed.), Digital Human Modeling. Applications in Health, Safety,
Ergonomics, and Risk Management: Ergonomics and Design: Proceedings of the 8th
International Conference, DHM 2017, Held as Part of HCI International, Vancouver,
BC, Canada, July 9-14, 2017, Part I. Springer International Publishing, Cham,
pp. 447–456.
Müller-Abdelrazeq, S.L., 2020. Triadisches Phasenmodell des Zusammenspiels von
Einstellungssubjekt, -objekt und -kontext bei der industriellen Mensch-RoboterInteraktion. Apprimus Verlag, Aachen, p. 240.
Murashov, V., Hearl, F., Howard, J., 2016. Working safely with robot workers:
Recommendations for the new workplace. J. Occup. Environ. Hyg. 13 (3), D61–D71.
https://doi.org/10.1080/15459624.2015.1116700.
Mutlu, B., Roy, N., Šabanović, S., 2016. Cognitive Human–Robot Interaction. In:
Siciliano, B., Khatib, O. (Eds.), Springer handbook of robotics, 2nd ed. Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 1907–1934.
Nam, C.S., Eskander, E., Choo, S., 2021. Neural dynamics of trust in human-robot
interaction. In: Nam, C.S., Lyons, J.B. (Eds.), Trust in Human-Robot Interaction.
Elsevier Academic Press, pp. 477–489.
Nass, C.I., Brave, S., 2007. Wired for Speech: How Voice Activates and Advances The
Human-Computer Relationship. MIT, Cambridge Mass.
Nijssen, S.R.R., Müller, B.C.N., van Baaren, R.B., Paulus, M., 2019. Saving the robot or
the human? robots who feel deserve moral care. Soc. Cogn. 37 (1), 41–56. https://
doi.org/10.1521/soco.2019.37.1.41.
Nomura, T., Kanda, T., Suzuki, T., Kato, K., 2004. Psychology in human-robot
communication: an attempt through investigation of negative attitudes and anxiety
toward robots. RO-MAN 2004. 13th IEEE International Workshop on Robot and
Human Interactive Communication, pp. 35–40. https://doi.org/10.1109/
ROMAN.2004.1374726 (IEEE Catalog No. 04TH8759).
Nunnally, J.C., Bernstein, I.H., 2008. Psychometric theory, 3rd ed. McGraw-Hill, New
York, NY, p. 752.
Obrist, M., Reitberger, W., Wurhofer, D., Förster, F., Tscheligi, M., 2011. User Experience
Research in the Semiconductor Factory: A Contradiction? In: Campos, P.,
Graham, N., Jorge, J., Nunes, N., Palanque, P., Winckler, M. (Eds.), Humancomputer interaction - INTERACT 2011: Proceedings of the 13th IFIP TC 13
international conference, Lisbon, Portugal, September 5 - 9, 2011 Part IV, 6949.
Springer, Berlin, pp. 144–151. Lisbon, Portugal, September 5 - 9, 2011, Part IV.
Oistad, B.C., Sembroski, C.E., Gates, K.A., Krupp, M.M., Fraune, M.R., Šabanović, S,
2016. Colleague or Tool? Interactivity Increases Positive Perceptions of and
Willingness to Interact with a Robotic Co-worker. In: Agah, A., Howard, A.M.,
Salichs, M.A., He, H., Cabibihan, J.-J. (Eds.), Social Robotics: Proceedings of the 8th
International Conference, ICSR 2016, Kansas City, MO, USA, November 1–3, 2016.
Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp. 774–785. November 1–3, 2016.
Oliveira, R., Arriaga, P., Alves-Oliveira, P., Correia, F., Petisca, S., Paiva, A., 2018.
Friends or Foes?. In: Proceedings of the 2018 ACM/IEEE International Conference on
Human-Robot Interaction - HRI ’18, Chicago, IL, USA. 05-08 March, 2018. ACM
Press, New York, NY, USA, pp. 279–288.
Onnasch, L., Roesler, E., 2019. Anthropomorphizing robots: the effect of framing in
human-robot collaboration. Proc. Human Factors Ergon. Soc. Ann. Meeting 63 (1),
1311–1315. https://doi.org/10.1177/1071181319631209.
Osmont, A., Cassotti, M., Agogué, M., Houdé, O., Moutier, S., 2015. Does ambiguity
aversion influence the framing effect during decision making? Psychon. Bull. Rev. 22
(2), 572–577. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13423-014-0688-0.
Ötting, S.K., Masjutin, L., Steil, J.J., Maier, G.W, 2020. Let’s work together: a metaanalysis on robot design features that enable successful human–robot interaction at
work. Human Factors Preprint Online, pp. 1–24.
Paepcke, S., Takayama, L., 2010. Judging a bot by its cover: An experiment on
expectation setting for personal robots. In: 5th ACM/IEEE International Conference
on Human-Robot Interaction (HRI), 2010: 2 - 5 March 2010, Osaka, Japan. IEEE,
Piscataway, NJ, pp. 45–52. Piscataway, NJ.
Parasuraman, R., Riley, V., 1997. Humans and Automation: Use, Misuse, Disuse, Abuse.
Hum. Factors 39 (2), 230–253. https://doi.org/10.1518/001872097778543886.

Phillips, E.K., Ososky, S., Grove, J., Jentsch, F.G, 2011. From tools to teammates: toward
the development of appropriate mental models for intelligent robots. Proc. Human
Factors Ergon. Soc. Ann. Meeting 55 (1), 1491–1495. https://doi.org/10.1177/
1071181311551310.
Pöhler, G., Heine, T., Deml, B., 2016. Itemanalyse und Faktorstruktur eines Fragebogens
zur Messung von Vertrauen im Umgang mit automatischen Systemen. Z. Arb. Wiss.
70 (3), 151–160. https://doi.org/10.1007/s41449-016-0024-9.
Powell, H., Michael, J., 2019. Feeling committed to a robot: why, what, when and how?
Philosophical transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biol. Sci. 374,
20180039 https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2018.0039.
Reeves, B., Nass, C.I., 1998. The media equation: How people treat computers, television,
and new media like real people and places, 1st ed. CSLI Publ, Stanford, Calif, p. 305.
Remmers, P., 2020. Ethische Perspektiven der Mensch-Roboter-Kollaboration. In:
Buxbaum, H.-J. (Ed.), Mensch-Roboter-Kollaboration. Springer, Fachmedien
Wiesbaden, Wiesbaden, pp. 55–68.
Richert, A., Müller, S.L., Schröder, S., Jeschke, S., 2017. Anthropomorphism in social
robotics: empirical results on human–robot interaction in hybrid production
workplaces. AI & Soc 1 (1), 71–80. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00146-017-0756-x.
Roesler, E., Onnasch, L., 2020a. Teammitglied oder Werkzeug – Der Einfluss
anthropomorpher Gestaltung in der Mensch-Roboter-Interaktion. In: Buxbaum, H.-J.
(Ed.) (Ed.), Mensch-Roboter-Kollaboration. Springer Fachmedien Wiesbaden,
Wiesbaden, pp. 163–175.
Roesler, E., Onnasch, L., 2020b. The effect of anthropomorphism and failure
comprehensibility on human-robot trust. In: Proceedings of the Human Factors and
Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting, 64, pp. 107–111. https://doi.org/10.1177/
1071181320641028.
Rohrmann, B., 1978. Empirische Studien zur Entwicklung von Antwortskalen für die
sozialwissenschaftliche Forschung. Zeitschrift für Sozialpsychologie 9, 222–245.
Rueben, M., Bernieri, F.J., Grimm, C.M., Smart, W.D, 2017. Framing effects on privacy
concerns about a home telepresence robot. In: Proceedings of the 2017 ACM/IEEE
International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction, Vienna, Austria. 6/3/2017 9/3/2017. ACM Press, New York, NY, USA, pp. 435–444.
Salvini, P., Laschi, C., Dario, P., 2010. Design for acceptability: improving robots’
coexistence in human society. Int. J. Soc. Robot. 2 (4), 451–460. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s12369-010-0079-2.
Sanders, T.L., Kaplan, A.D., Koch, R., Schwartz, M., Hancock, P.A, 2019. The relationship
between trust and use choice in human-robot interaction. Hum. Factors 61 (4),
614–626. https://doi.org/10.1177/0018720818816838.
Sanders, T.L., MacArthur, K., Volante, W., Hancock, G., MacGillivray, T., Shugars, W.,
Hancock, P.A, 2017. Trust and prior experience in human-robot interaction. Proc.
Human Factors Ergon. Soc. Ann. Meeting 61 (1), 1809–1813. https://doi.org/
10.1177/1541931213601934.
Sauppé, A., Mutlu, B., 2015. The social impact of a robot co-worker in industrial settings.
In: CHI 2015 crossings: Proceedings of the 33rd Annual CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems; April 18 - 23, 2015, Seoul, Republic of Korea. ACM,
New York, NY, USA, pp. 3613–3622.
Schröder, J., Epley, N., 2016. Mistaking minds and machines: how speech affects
dehumanization and anthropomorphism. J. Experimental Psychol. General 145 (11),
1427–1437. https://doi.org/10.1037/xge0000214.
Sheridan, T.B., 2016. Human-robot interaction: status and challenges. Hum. Factors 58
(4), 525–532. https://doi.org/10.1177/0018720816644364.
Smith, M.A.B., Wiese, E, 2016. Look at me now: investigating delayed disengagement for
ambiguous human-robot stimuli. In: Agah, A., Howard, A.M., Salichs, M.A., He, H.,
Cabibihan, J.-J. (Eds.), Social Robotics: Proceedings of the 8th International
Conference, ICSR 2016 Kansas City, MO, USA, November 1–3, 2016, 9979. Springer
International Publishing, Cham, pp. 950–960.
Stadler, S., Weiss, A., Mirnig, N., Tscheligi, M., 2013. Anthropomorphism in the factory a paradigm change?. In: HRI 2013: Proceedings of the 8th ACM/IEEE International
Conference on Human-Robot Interaction, Tokyo, Japan. 03-06 March, 2013. IEEE,
Piscataway, NJ, pp. 231–232.
Steil, J.J., Maier, G.W. 2017. Robots in the Digitalized Workplace, in: Hertel, G. (Ed.),
The Wiley Blackwell handbook of the psychology of the Internet at work, vol. 19. John
Wiley & Sons Ltd, Hoboken, NJ, pp. 401–422.
Stenzel, A., Chinellato, E., Bou, M.A.T., del Pobil, Á.P., Lappe, M., Liepelt, R., 2012a.
When humanoid robots become human-like interaction partners: corepresentation of
robotic actions. J. Exp. Psychol. Hum. Percept. Perform. 38 (5), 1073–1077. https://
doi.org/10.1037/a0029493.
Stenzel, A., Chinellato, E., del Pobil, Á.P., Lappe, M., Liepelt, R., 2012b. How deeply do
we include robotic agents in the self? Int. J. Humanoid Rob. 10 (1), 1–13.
Stocké, V., 2002. Framing und Rationalität: Die Bedeutung der Informationsdarstellung
für das Entscheidungsverhalten. De Gruyter Oldenbourg, Munich, p. 293. Zugl.:
Mannheim, Univ., Dissertationsschrift, 2000.
Turja, T., Oksanen, A., 2019. Robot acceptance at work: a multilevel analysis based on 27
EU Countries. Int. J. Soc. Robot. 11 (4), 679–689. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12369019-00526-x.
Vincent, J., Taipale, S., Sapio, B., Lugano, G., Fortunati, L., 2015. Social Robots from a
Human Perspective. Springer International Publishing, Cham, p. 149.
Waytz, A., Cacioppo, J.T., Epley, N., 2010. Who sees human? The stability and
importance of individual differences in anthropomorphism. Perspect. Psychol. Sci. 5
(3), 219–232. https://doi.org/10.1177/1745691610369336.
Waytz, A., Heafner, J., Epley, N., 2014. The mind in the machine: Anthropomorphism
increases trust in an autonomous vehicle. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 52, 113–117. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jesp.2014.01.005.
Weis, P.P., Wiese, E. 2020. Know Your Cognitive Environment! Mental Models as Crucial
Determinant of Offloading Preferences. Human factors, 18720820956861. https://
doi.org/10.1177/0018720820956861.

16

T. Kopp et al.

International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 158 (2022) 102730
Winckler, M. (Eds.), Proceedings of the 15th IFIP TC 13 International Conference,
Bamberg, Germany, September 14 - 18, 2015, 9298. Springer, Cham, pp. 203–220.
Xing, B., Marwala, T. 2018. Introduction to Human Robot Interaction, in: Xing, B.,
Marwala, T. (Eds.), Smart maintenance for human-robot interaction: An intelligent
search algorithmic perspective, vol. 129. Springer-Verlag, Cham, pp. 3–19.
You, S., Robert, L., 2019. Trusting Robots in Teams: Examining the Impacts of Trusting
Robots on Team Performance and Satisfaction. Forthcoming. In: Proceedings of the
52nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, pp. 1–10. https://doi.
org/10.24251/HICSS.2019.031.
You, S., Robert, L.P, 2018. Human-Robot Similarity and Willingness to Work with a
Robotic Co-worker. In: Proceedings of the 2018 ACM/IEEE International Conference
on Human-Robot Interaction - HRI ’18, Chicago, IL, USA. 05-08 March, 2018. ACM
Press, New York, NY, USA, pp. 251–260.
Zawieska, K., Duffy, B.R., Spronska, A., 2012. Understanding anthropomorphisation in
social robotics. Pomiary automatyka Robotyka (11), 78–82.
Ziegler, R., 2010. Ambiguität und Ambivalenz in der Psychologie: Begriffsverständnis
und Begriffsverwendung. Zeitschrift für Literaturwissenschaft und Linguistik 40
(158), 125–171.
Złotowski, J., Proudfoot, D., Yogeeswaran, K., Bartneck, C., 2015. Anthropomorphism:
Opportunities and Challenges in Human–Robot Interaction. Int. J. Soc. Robot. (7),
347–360.
Złotowski, J., Strasser, E., Bartneck, C., 2014. Dimensions of anthropomorphism. In: HRI
2014: Proceedings of the 2014 ACM/IEEE International Conference on HumanRobot Interaction, Bielefeld, Germany. 03-06 March, 2014, New York, NY. ACM,
pp. 66–73.
Złotowski, J., Sumioka, H., Eyssel, F., Nishio, S., Bartneck, C., Ishiguro, H., 2018. Model
of Dual Anthropomorphism: The Relationship Between the Media Equation Effect
and Implicit Anthropomorphism. Int. J. Soc. Robot. 34 (4), 1–14. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s12369-018-0476-5.
Złotowski, J., Yogeeswaran, K., Bartneck, C., 2017. Can we control it?: Autonomous
robots threaten human identity, uniqueness, safety, and resources. Int. J. Hum.
Comput. Stud. 100, 48–54. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhcs.2016.12.008.

Weiss, A., Huber, A., 2016. User Experience of a Smart Factory Robot: Assembly Line
Workers Demand Adaptive Robots. In: 5th International Symposium on New
Frontiers in Human-Robot Interaction 2016.
Weiss, A., Huber, A., Minichberger, J., Ikeda, M., 2016. First Application of Robot
Teaching in an Existing Industry 4.0 Environment: Does It Really Work? Societies 6
(3), 1–21. https://doi.org/10.3390/soc6030020.
Wen, J., Stewart, A., Billinghurst, M., Dey, A., Tossell, C.C., Finomore, V.S, 2018. He who
hesitates is lost (…in thoughts over a robot). In: Proceedings of the Technology,
Mind, and Society on ZZZ - TechMindSociety ’18. the Technology, Mind, and
Society, Washington, DC, USA. 4/5/2018 - 4/7/2018. ACM Press, New York, New
York, USA, pp. 1–6.
Wiese, E., Metta, G., Wykowska, A., 2017. Robots As Intentional Agents: Using
Neuroscientific Methods to Make Robots Appear More Social. Frontiers in
psychology 8 (1663). https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2017.01663.
Wiese, E., Weis, P.P, 2020. It matters to me if you are human - Examining categorical
perception in human and nonhuman agents. Int. J. Hum. Comput. Stud. 133, 1–12.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhcs.2019.08.002.
Wullenkord, R., Eyssel, F., 2014. Improving attitudes towards social robots using
imagined contact. In: RO-MAN: the 23rd IEEE International Symposium on Robot
and Human Interactive Communication, 2014, pp. 489–494.
Wullenkord, R., Eyssel, F., 2019. Imagine how to behave: the influence of imagined
contact on human-robot interaction. Philosophical transactions of the Royal Society
of London. Series B, Biological sciences 374 (1771), 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1098/
rstb.2018.0038.
Wullenkord, R., Fraune, M.R., Eyssel, F., Šabanović, S., 2016. Getting in Touch: How
Imagined, Actual, and Physical Contact Affect Evaluations of Robots. In: 2016 25th
IEEE International Symposium on Robot and Human Interactive Communication
(RO-MAN), August 26-31, 2016. Columbia University, NY, USA. IEEE Press,
pp. 980–985.
Wurhofer, D., Meneweger, T., Fuchsberger, V., Tscheligi, M., 2015. Deploying Robots in
a Production Environment: A Study on Temporal Transitions of Workers’
Experiences. In: Abascal González, J., Barbosa, S., Fetter, M., Gross, T., Palanque, P.,

17

