2370

IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS, VOL. 3, NO. 3, JULY 2018

Learning Object Grasping for Soft Robot Hands
Changhyun Choi

, Wilko Schwarting

Abstract—We present a three-dimensional deep convolutional
neural network (3D CNN) approach for grasping unknown objects with soft hands. Soft hands are compliant and capable of
handling uncertainty in sensing and actuation, but come at the
cost of unpredictable deformation of the soft fingers. Traditional
model-driven grasping approaches, which assume known models
for objects, robot hands, and stable grasps with expected contacts,
are inapplicable to such soft hands, since predicting contact points
between objects and soft hands is not straightforward. Our solution adopts a deep CNN approach to find good caging grasps for
previously unseen objects by learning effective features and a classifier from point cloud data. Unlike recent CNN models applied to
robotic grasping which have been trained on 2D or 2.5D images
and limited to a fixed top grasping direction, we exploit the power
of a 3D CNN model to estimate suitable grasp poses from multiple
grasping directions (top and side directions) and wrist orientations,
which has great potential for geometry-related robotic tasks. Our
soft hands guided by the 3D CNN algorithm show 87% successful
grasping on previously unseen objects. A set of comparative evaluations shows the robustness of our approach with respect to noise
and occlusions.
Index Terms—Perception for grasping and manipulation, deep
learning in robotics and automation.

I. INTRODUCTION
N ROBOTIC manipulation, robust object grasping is an important prerequisite for advanced autonomous manipulation
tasks. While object grasping with robotic manipulators has been
actively studied for decades [1], reliable grasping of previously
unseen objects is still a challenging problem. The main challenges are the uncertainties in perception and action. Earlier
work has leveraged prior knowledge of object shape, manipulator, stable grasps, etc. [2]. These model-driven approaches,
however, are problematic when prior knowledge is partial or
not available. Recent work has focused more on learning from
data with hope of generalizing to novel situations by learning

I

Manuscript received September 9, 2017; accepted February 5, 2018. Date of
publication February 28, 2018; date of current version March 28, 2018. This
letter was recommended for publication by Associate Editor F. L. Hammond III
and Editor H. Ding upon evaluation of the reviewers’ comments. This work was
supported in part by the Boeing Company, in part by the National Science Foundation IIS 1226883, and in part by the National Science Foundation Graduate
Research Fellowship 1122374. (Corresponding Author: Changhyun Choi.)
The authors are with the Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139 USA
(e-mail: cchoi@csail.mit.edu; wilkos@csail.mit.edu; delpreto@csail.mit.edu;
rus@csail.mit.edu).
This letter has supplemental downloadable multimedia material available at
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org, provided by the authors. The Supplementary Materials contain a video briefly explaining the main idea of the work and showing
the soft robot hand grasping previously unknown objects. This material is 24.2
MB in size.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LRA.2018.2810544

, Joseph DelPreto

, and Daniela Rus

Fig. 1. Baxter with soft hands. Our Baxter robot has two soft hands on its end
effectors. A depth sensor is affixed to the upper torso of the robot, and point
clouds from the sensor are used to predict suitable grasps for soft hands so as to
successfully grasp the objects on the table. The right four figures show our fourfinger soft hand in action. Each finger is controlled by an external pneumatic
actuator and the Baxter’s original parallel gripper actuator is further controlled
to maximize the acquisition region.

a mapping function from raw sensory data to a grasp representation [3]. However, these learned grasp representations are
rather limited as they often use a 2D grasp location and 1D
wrist orientation with a fixed grasping direction, which does not
generalize to 6-DoF grasp reasoning and thus does not utilize
the full workspace of the robot arm for grasp planning. Robot
hands with hard fingers require careful positioning to achieve
closure grasps, and the placement of the fingers is usually sensitive to uncertainties. To overcome this limitation, soft robot
hands have been actively studied and fabricated using soft materials [4]. The main advantages of soft hands include compliance
with external perturbation and tolerance of uncertainties in actuation and perception [5], which enable soft hands to be more
suitable for manipulating unknown objects. Moreover, manufacturing of soft hands is faster and less expensive than their
hard counterparts [4].
In this letter, we design a soft robotic manipulation system
which is capable of grasping previously unseen objects. Fig. 1
shows our Baxter robot setup with two soft hands mounted on
its end effectors. A depth sensor, which is affixed to the upper
torso of the robot, obtains partial point clouds of the objects
on the table. Given the input clouds, a 3D CNN model predicts
the likelihood of success of a set of suitable grasps. Together
with the grasp poses, the compliance and adaptability of the
soft hands yield successful grasping of novel objects. The work
described in this letter uses neither proprioceptive sensors nor
3D object models; it learns appropriate grasps from partial point
cloud data and generalizes well to new objects the robot has
never seen before. The main contributions of this letter are as
follows:

2377-3766 © 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Soongsil University. Downloaded on March 05,2026 at 12:02:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHOI et al.: LEARNING OBJECT GRASPING FOR SOFT ROBOT HANDS

r 3D CNN-based grasp prediction: Our approach exploits
the power of a 3D CNN model to predict a set of suitable
grasp poses from a partial 3D point cloud of an object.
While many learning-based approaches have focused on
predicting wrist orientations with a fixed top grasping direction, our approach predicts both grasping directions and
wrist orientations which determine a set of suitable grasp
poses.
r Vision-based soft hands: Unlike most soft hands demonstrating object grasping with human operation or known
object pose, we propose an end-to-end system that combines vision and soft actuation. In particular, we combine
soft hands with the 3D CNN grasping prediction to reliably
grasp previously unseen objects.
The rationale behind our approach is that the 3D CNN grasp
prediction and soft hands complement each other. A set of
discretized grasp poses from learning-based methods requires
adaptable grasping as there is always a discrepancy between the
predicted grasp pose and real object pose. At the same time, soft
hands necessitate good grasping guidance in spite of their compliance and adaptability. To the best of our knowledge, this is
the first work to apply a 3D CNN-based grasp prediction to soft
hands. While the work in [6] presented a learning from demonstration approach for soft hands, the work employed a marker
system to obtain object trajectories, and thus no learning occurs
on the visual perception side. In addition, their object grasping
capability has hinged upon a set of human demonstrations for
a known object. Our work is different in that it learns a suitable grasp policy from the partial point cloud of a previously
unknown object.
The paper is organized as follows. Section II reviews prior
work in robotic object grasping. After our problem is formalized in Section III, the details of our approach are described in
Section IV. Section V presents experimental results on grasp
pose prediction and object grasping with our soft manipulator.
II. RELATED WORK
Robotic grasping and grasp synthesis have been actively studied in robotics literature [1]. While there are many ways to
categorize this literature [1], [7], the research approaches of
object grasping can be roughly divided into model-driven and
data-driven approaches.
A. Model-driven Approaches
Classical object grasping approaches rely on prior knowledge. Such knowledge includes known stable grasp and contact
information, 3D models of objects and manipulators, and their
physical properties such as weights, centers of mass, friction
coefficients, etc. [2]. The goal of these approaches is to find a
set of stable force closures to grasp the known objects [8], [9].
Since the models of objects are given, the grasping approaches
are based on object recognition and pose estimation with known
object grasps [10], [11] or grasp candidates sampled from the
known model or simpler geometric primitives [12], [13]. As reviewing extensive model-driven approaches is beyond the scope

2371

of this letter, we refer the reader to comprehensive literature surveys [1], [7].
B. Data-driven Approaches
While model-driven approaches assume rich prior knowledge, data-driven approaches gain knowledge of objects and
grasping from data. The key idea is to map directly from visual
sensor data to grasp representations. The most popular representation is the grasping rectangle describing suitable grasping in
the image plane [3], [14], which is of lower dimension than the
traditional grasping parameters such as the grasping point, the
approach vector, the wrist orientation, and the initial finger configuration [1]. While a simple logistic regression was proven to
be an effective learning algorithm for object grasping [14], more
recently deep neural network models outperformed the previous
method [3]. In particular, convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
have been successful in generic object recognition [15] due
to their end-to-end feature learning in a hierarchical structure.
Following the success, the CNN models have recently been applied to robotic graping [16]–[21]. Common approaches employ
CNN models to classify feasibility of a set of grasping hypotheses. Training data has been generated via crowdsourcing [16],
physics simulation with 3D model databases [16]–[18], [21], or
trial-and-error [19], [22]. Since our approach uses soft hands
which are hard to model in physics simulation and crowdsourcing, we adopt the trial-and-error scheme to collect the training
data with the ground truth grasp labels annotated manually.
While the most common modality for CNN models is monocular images, visual perception for object grasping can potentially
benefit from depth data. The main advantages of using depth data
include 1) invariance to photometric variations such as color or
texture, and 2) exploiting geometric information closely related
to object grasping. Although some prior works employed depth
as a sensory modality, their usages were restricted to object
proposal [19] or 2.5D depth information [3], [21], [23] without
exploiting the full 3D shape information. Robust 3D reasoning
is important for the object grasping problem, as the problem is
closely related to geometric characteristics and constraints of
objects and their surrounding environments. The work in [23]
employed a CNN model that learns a grasp quality from a depth
image. While their system uses point clouds as a visual input,
the CNN model treats it as 2.5D image not 3D, and thus the object grasp pose is limited to top grasping. Recently, full 3D CNN
models have been studied and show state-of-the-art performance
for shape-based object recognition tasks [24], [25]. These 3D
CNNs are relatively new models and have great potential for
geometry-related robotic perception.
C. Soft Hands
Robust object manipulation in unstructured environments is
a challenging problem due to the uncertainty associated with
complex and unpredictable environments. Conventional robot
hands, requiring multiple articulated fingers and sensors, are
expensive to manufacture and control, and are often fragile in
these unstructured environments. More adaptive and compliant robot hands were explored that use underactuation [26].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Soongsil University. Downloaded on March 05,2026 at 12:02:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2372

IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS, VOL. 3, NO. 3, JULY 2018

Recently, new types of robot hands have been designed and
fabricated using soft materials [4], [27]. The main advantage of soft hands is compliance, which is well suited for
manipulation tasks handling delicate, irregularly shaped, or unknown objects. In addition, soft hands are more tolerant of uncertainties in perception and actuation [5].
III. PROBLEM FORMULATION
The grasping problem we solve in this letter can be formalized
as follows:
Definition 1: Given a point cloud P ⊂ R3 , the goal is to find
an appropriate grasp pose Xg ∈ SE(3) for a previously unseen
object o ∈ O that is placed with arbitrary pose in P within the
field of view of the robot.
The grasp pose Xg is in the Special Euclidean group SE(3),
which represents the 3D rigid body transformation, and is defined with respect to the robot coordinate frame. The point cloud
P is obtained via a depth sensor affixed to a robot with a known
extrinsic parameter Xrs , by which the cloud P is transformed
from the sensor coordinate frame to the robot coordinate frame.
In P, if multiple objects O exist, a grasping pose Xg should be
estimated for each object o ∈ O. An important assumption is
that
Assumption 1: There is no prior knowledge of the objects O (e.g., no shape model, weight distribution, center of
mass, friction coefficients, stable grasp configurations, etc.).
We wish to learn to predict Xg directly from data P. As there
are infinite poses for a given object o, we constrain Xg so that
our 3D CNN learns effectively as follows:
Constraint 1: The grasping pose Xg ∈ SE(3) is constrained such that the grasping direction δ̂ is one of Nδ = 6 directions (top, left, left-front, front, right-front, and right), and the
wrist orientation ω̂ is one of Nω = 4 orientations (0◦ , 45◦ , 90◦ ,
and 135◦ ).
Fig. 2 depicts six grasping directions and four wrist orientations. The rationale behind this grasping direction and wrist
orientation is in [28] which has shown that grasps orthogonal
to objects’ principal axes tend to be more stable than randomly
sampled grasps. Discretization of grasping orientation is common in CNN-based grasping approaches since CNNs perform
better on classification rather than regression problems [19],
[21]. Although we chose six grasping directions and four wrist
orientations in this work, this framework can be easily adapted to
a different number of grasping directions and wrist orientations
depending on task requirements. In general, the more outputs
the CNN has, the more training data is required. The training
data amount will increase linearly with respect to the number of
outputs, and hence the computation cost will increase linearly
as well. However, it was recently shown that most of the energy, about 80% of the entire computational effort, is consumed
by the convolution layers [29]. If we add additional approaching directions to the output layers, it will change only the last
fully connected layer. Therefore, the computation cost will be
increased at worst sub-linear.

IV. PROPOSED APPROACH
A. System Overview
Our grasping system is composed of one Baxter robot and
two soft hands attached to its end effectors as shown in Fig. 1.
A depth sensor is affixed to the upper body of the robot looking
down on the table. The flow of our grasping system is described
in Fig. 3. When there are objects on the table, our system obtains a point cloud P and finds a set of segmented object point
clouds S by removing the planar background in P 1 . Each segmented point cloud s ∈ S is then voxelized to a 3D voxel grid
G ∈ ZN g ×N g ×N g where each voxel in the grid is either −1 (not
occupied) or 1 (occupied) and Ng is the edge length of the
cubic voxel grid. During the voxelization, the point cloud is
aligned to the lower center of G. Given G, our 3D CNN model
determines the most likely grasping direction δ̂ and wrist orientation ω̂, and the chosen grasp is then executed with our soft
hand robot manipulator. Algorithm 1 explains the details of the
grasping prediction procedure. The algorithm takes the point
cloud P and the trained 3D CNN model N as inputs and returns
the set of grasp poses X ⊂ SE(3) for each segmented object
cloud s ∈ S, i.e., |X | = |S|. The direction δ̂ and orientation ω̂
determine the most likely rotation of the grasp pose Xg , while
the translation t of Xg (i.e., wrist location) is estimated via the
voxel coordinates contacting with δ̂. One may sample the voxel
along the principal axis of the voxel grid, but picking the center
voxel has proven to be effective in our system.
B. 3D Convolutional Neural Network
To determine appropriate grasping directions and wrist orientations given an input point cloud, we train a 3D convolutional neural network (CNN). Inspired by [25], our 3D CNN
model is composed of convolution, pooling, and dense layers. The architecture of our model is shown in Fig. 4. The
input layer is a 32 × 32 × 32 3D voxel grid G which is voxelized from the raw 3D point cloud. There are two convolution layers where the first and second layers have 32 filters
1 While the tabletop manipulation assumption for object segmentation is considered in this work, our pipeline can easily accommodate advanced segmentation approaches, such as [30], [31], in order to relax the tabletop assumption.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Soongsil University. Downloaded on March 05,2026 at 12:02:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHOI et al.: LEARNING OBJECT GRASPING FOR SOFT ROBOT HANDS

2373

Fig. 2. Grasping directions and wrist orientations. Given an object, our approach discretizes grasping directions to six directions and wrist orientations to four
orientations. The total number of grasp orientations is thus 6 × 4 = 24. The grasping directions include both top grasp δ1 as well as side grasps δ2 , . . . , δ6 . Each
wrist orientation corresponds to the principal axis (dotted gray line) of the box-shaped object. The discretization step is 45◦ . Although these grasping directions
and wrist orientations are quite coarse, our soft hands are compliant enough to adapt to the discrepancy in object orientation. (a) Grasping directions (b) Wrist
orientations

Fig. 3. Grasping Pipeline. The pipeline starts from the raw point cloud P and segments object clouds S from P. Each segment cloud is voxelized to generate a
voxel grid G. Our approach is two-fold. First, it predicts the most likely grasping direction δ̂ from G (solid arrows). Second, given δ̂, the voxel grid is transformed
so that the chosen direction δ̂ is from the top of the transformed voxel grid G  . The 3D CNN then estimates the most likely wrist orientation ω̂ (dotted arrows).
Finally, the chosen grasping direction δ̂ and wrist orientation ω̂ determine the rotation part of the grasp pose, and the translation part of the pose is determined by
the contacting voxel with δ̂.

Fig. 4. 3D CNN Architecture. Our network is composed of two convolution layers, one max pooling layer, and two dense (fully connected) layers. The input
layer is the voxel grid G of 32 × 32 × 32 size, in which each voxel grid has either −1 (unoccupied) or 1 (occupied). The output layer returns the probabilities of
N δ and N ω classes. In our problem, N δ = 6 directions and N ω = 4 orientations are considered. Details of convolution and max pooling layers are described in
each layer.

of 5 × 5 × 5 and 3 × 3 × 3 size, respectively. After the convolution layers, the data is fed into the max pooling layer of
2 × 2 × 2 followed by two dense layers, 128 and Nδ + Nω each.
Unlike the model in [25], the output layer of our model
is activated via the sigmoid function instead of the softmax

function because the output should be Nδ + Nω independent
probabilities, not the probability distribution over Nδ grasping
directions and Nω wrist orientations (i.e., 0 ≤ p(δi ), p(ωj ) ≤ 1
 δ
where i = 1, 2, . . . , Nδ , j = 1, 2, . . . , Nω , not N
i=1 p(δi ) = 1
N ω
and j =1 p(ωj ) = 1). Hence, our loss function is defined by

Authorized licensed use limited to: Soongsil University. Downloaded on March 05,2026 at 12:02:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2374

IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS, VOL. 3, NO. 3, JULY 2018

the binary cross-entropy instead of the categorical cross-entropy.
We use the binary voxel grid in the input layer, which has only a
binary state (occupied or unoccupied) in each voxel, as [25] reported that the performance difference between binary, hit, and
density grid for object recognition tasks is negligible. Although
we designed this model for grasping with soft hands, we believe
that this approach is general. So it should be applicable to arbitrary robot end effectors, hard and soft hands and parallel jaw
grippers, by adjusting Nδ and Nω depending on the compliance
of the end effector.
C. Soft Hand Control
Once the grasp pose is determined by the 3D CNN, the robot
arm with our soft hand approaches a target object and grasps it.
Our soft hand in action is shown in Fig. 1, and its detailed design
and fabrication methods are explained in [27]. Each hand has
four soft fingers controlled by a set of four external pneumatic
actuators. Two parts connect these fingers to the wrist of the
Baxter robot arm; one part connects three fingers in a row to
the wrist, and the other part connects a single finger opposing
them. The wrist has a linear sliding actuator which controls the
distance between the two parts. In total, there are five control
inputs for one soft hand. While it is possible to learn to control
these 5D control parameters, it requires substantial grasp data
for training. Instead, we employ a fixed two-state control policy
which has open and close states2 . This simpler control leverages
a main benefit of soft hands, namely their innate compliance.
D. Training With Grasping Data
To prepare the object grasping dataset, we chose 10 training
objects as shown in Fig. 5a. Each data entry has a voxel grid
converted from a partial point cloud, and its associated ground
truth label of grasping success obtained by executing with our
soft hands.3 We have collected 719 labeled data entries for the
10 training objects. We further augment the training dataset by
transforming the voxel grids, such as by mirroring and translating, and the total number of data entries is 21,570.4 The ground
truth labels were also adjusted when the voxel grids were mirrored. The network was trained with the adadelta optimizer.
V. EXPERIMENTS
To evaluate the effectiveness of our approach in object grasping tasks, we run a set of comparative evaluations. Five approaches, including our approach, are compared. 1) 3DCNN,
our approach described in this letter, predicts the probability
of grasping directions and wrist orientations via our 3D CNN.
2 In the open state, there is no air pressure applied to the soft fingers and
the distance between one and three fingers is the longest. In the close state,
maximum air pressure is applied to the fingers and the distance between fingers
is the shortest.
3 Each ground truth label has two binary vectors l ∈ RN δ , l ∈ RN ω
ω
δ
+
+
where lδ (i) = 1, lω (j) = 1 if δi , ω j are successful grasps. Otherwise, lδ (i) =
0, lω (j) = 0.
4 For each voxel grid, we flipped left and right followed by 14 translations (4
translations in x and y (−2, −1, 1, 2) and 6 translations in z (1, 2, . . . , 6)). In
total, 719 × 2 × (1 + 14) = 21, 570 training voxel grids were obtained.

Fig. 5. Training and testing objects. We use the 10 training objects to
train our CNN and evaluate its performance on the 10 test objects. Note the
shape differences between the training and test objects. (a) Training objects
(b) Test objects

2) RAND randomly chooses one of the grasping directions and
wrist orientations instead of estimating them from the CNN. It
serves as a baseline showing the effectiveness of the soft hands
without the use of visual perception. 3) SVM is an approach using
Support Vector Machine (SVM). A voxel grid is flattened and
used as a (32 × 32 × 32 = 32, 768 dimensional) feature vector.
As there are multiple feasible grasping directions and wrist orientations for a given voxel grid, a set of multiple binary SVM
classifiers was separately trained on each grasping direction
and wrist orientation. In this experiment, Nδ + Nω = 10 SVM
classifiers were trained on the training dataset. 4) PCA is an
approach using Principal Component Analysis (PCA). Given a
voxel grid, this approach estimates the first principal component
(PC) which is often aligned with the principal axis of the voxel
grid. If the PC is upright (i.e., the orientation of PC is more than
45◦ from the ground surface), its grasping direction is one of the
side grasps (δ2 , δ3 , . . . , δ6 ). Otherwise, its grasping direction is
the top grasp δ1 . In the former case, the voxel grid is transformed
as shown in Fig. 3, and the wrist orientation is determined by
the x, y values of the PC, which are corresponding to the wrist
orientation as shown in Fig. 2b. This is an example of human
engineered approaches. Since the PCA is a purely geometric
approach, it does not require a training phase and predicts only
the best grasping direction and wrist orientation. 5) FCN, an
approach based on a fully connected network (FCN), has two
hidden layers followed by two dropout layers for regularization.
This is a baseline highlighting the performance difference between convolutional networks and multi-layer neural networks.
A. Grasp Pose Prediction
In this experiment, we evaluate the accuracy of grasp pose
prediction in a test dataset. The test dataset is composed of 638

Authorized licensed use limited to: Soongsil University. Downloaded on March 05,2026 at 12:02:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHOI et al.: LEARNING OBJECT GRASPING FOR SOFT ROBOT HANDS

2375

TABLE I
GRASPING PREDICTION ACCURACY ON THE TEST DATASET

the PCA is substantially affected by the noise voxels. Since the
PCA mainly relies on the principal axis of objects to reason
about the grasping direction, a few number of noise voxels are
critical to the approach. The SVM is relatively less sensitive than
the PCA, but the accuracy of the SVM monotonously decreases
as noise and occlusions increase. The FCN is not affected by
noise or occlusions because the grasping direction of the FCN is
overfitted to the top grasp, while the 3DCNN approach is slightly
disrupted by occlusions.
For the wrist orientation, the 3DCNN approach clearly outperforms all other approaches. The FCN is not encouraging for
predicting wrist orientation, and it consistently performs worse
than the SVM baseline. The PCA is seriously affected by noise,
and when occlusions are severe its prediction is even worse than
guessing randomly, RAND. From this evaluation, we notice that
the 3DCNN approach is more robust than the other approaches.
We attribute the superior performance of the 3DCNN to the hierarchical structure of CNN wherein the convolution with the
learned filters effectively suppress noise voxels and the amalgamation of multi-layer responses enables our approach to predict
robustly even with serious occlusions.

Grasping Direction (%)
Wrist Orientation (%)

RAND

PCA

SVM

FCN

3DCNN

26.67
31.67

96.55
97.49

93.09
80.84

100.00
72.73

97.60
99.77

voxel grids from the 10 test objects and their corresponding
grasping direction and wrist orientation labels. For each approach, if the chosen grasping direction and wrist orientation
belong to the labels, they are regarded as an accurate prediction, otherwise inaccurate. As the RAND and PCA approaches
only return one hypothesis for a given input, for fair comparison the best hypothesis is chosen for the other approaches and
compared with the labels. The grasping accuracy on the test
dataset is reported in Table I. Among the five approaches, the
RAND approach reports the worst performance in terms of accuracy. The random choice of grasping direction is slightly better
than 25% since the expected chance is N1δ where Nδ = 6 and
some objects allow multiple grasping directions due to their
symmetry. The PCA works reasonably well, but we noticed that
it returns a wrong prediction when the partial voxel grid does
not give a clue to its complete shape. The SVM is worse than
the PCA, in particular in its wrist orientation. The FCN shows
perfect prediction in grasping direction, but it turns out that the
FCN was overfitted to top grasping direction δ1 . Since all examples in both the training and test datasets allow δ1 direction, it
always predicts the top direction as the highest probability rather
than considering the side grasps. Moreover, its wrist orientation
prediction is the second worst among the five approaches. By
comparing the FCN and 3DCNN, our 3D CNN is much more capable of predicting the correct wrist orientation, although both
approaches use deep neural networks. We ascribe this to its 3D
structure reasoning. Whereas the FCN simply treats the voxel
grids as real valued features, the 3DCNN examines the geometric
structures of the voxel grids with learned 3D voxel filters. This
difference leads to the significant distinction in the prediction
accuracy. The PCA is the second best approach among the five
approaches, but we will see in the next section how it degrades
with noise and occlusions.
B. Robustness to Noise and Occlusions
Since voxel grids are obtained via segmentation, it is common
to have unexpected noise, wrong segments, or occlusions. In this
section, we compare the robustness of the five approaches with
respect to noise and occlusions. To this end, we add artificial
noise to voxel grids or randomly remove some voxel planes
to simulate occlusions. The prediction accuracies of the five
approaches with noise and occlusions are reported in Fig. 6.
For statistically meaningful results, we ran 30 trials for each
noise level and calculated the mean and standard deviation of
the prediction outcome.
For the grasping direction, both the SVM and PCA approaches
are increasingly inaccurate as the number of noise voxels and
the number of occluded voxel planes increase. In particular,

C. Object Grasping With a Soft Robot Hand
In this experiment, we run an object grasping experiment
in which the goal is to pick up a given object on the table. We
placed each object on the table with a random location and pose.
The robot system and its experiment setting is shown in Fig. 1.
If the system can grasp and lift the test object for more than
3 seconds, it is regarded as success. If the system cannot grasp
the object or the object slips from the hand within 3 seconds,
it is counted as failure. While in the previous experiments each
approach chose one best grasp pose, in this experiment each
approach examines a set of grasp poses whose probability is
over a certain threshold value τp = 0.5. The set of grasp poses
is sorted in decreasing order of their probability. The system tries
the best grasp pose first to check for feasibility. If the best grasp
pose is not feasible due to the kinematic constraints of the robot,
it tries the next best pose until it is able to find a valid trajectory
plan. We have performed 10 trials for each object with varying
locations and orientations. Since there are 10 test objects and
5 prediction approaches, the total number of grasping trials for
this experiment was 10 × 10 × 5 = 500.
Fig. 7 presents the grasping success rate of the five approaches
on the test objects, and the average grasping accuracy of the
approaches are reported in the rightmost bars. Depending on
the type and shape of the objects, the grasping rate of these
approaches varies. However, the 3DCNN approach clearly outperforms the other approaches in terms of success rate. The
3DCNN approach achieves 87% successful grasping for the previously unseen objects, while the RAND approach shows about
15% chance of successful grasping. The performance of the
PCA and SVM are similar at about 62%, while the FCN shows
slightly inferior performance. Unlike the previous experiments,
this experiment considers further challenges, such as kinematic
constraints and workspace limitations of robot arms and the feasibility of trajectory plans. As the RAND and PCA return only

Authorized licensed use limited to: Soongsil University. Downloaded on March 05,2026 at 12:02:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2376

IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS, VOL. 3, NO. 3, JULY 2018

Fig. 6. Prediction accuracy with respect to noise and occlusions. The prediction accuracies of grasping direction δ̂ and wrist orientation ω̂ for five approaches
are reported with different degrees of noise and occlusions. We added artificial random noise voxels to the set of test voxel grids. We randomly removed some
consecutive voxel planes to mimic occlusions. The solid lines represent means and the shaded areas depict standard deviation.

Fig. 7. Grasping success rates using a real robot. The successful grasping rates of five approaches on the 10 test objects. The plot clearly shows the effectiveness
of our approach, 3DCNN, which achieves 87% of successful grasping for previously unseen objects.

Fig. 8. Successful grasps of the 3DCNN approach. Our approach reliably grasps various objects even if these objects are unknown to the robot. The 3D CNN
model generalizes for these previously unseen objects and enables our soft hands to approach them using correct directions and wrist orientations for grasping.

Fig. 9. Unsuccessful grasps of the RAND approach. Though our soft hands are compliant and adaptable to a certain degree of discrepancy, random trials often
result in poor grasping as shown here. It clearly shows that an appropriate grasp pose is crucial even for these compliant soft hands.

Fig. 10. Unsuccessful grasps of the 3DCNN approach. For each object, two images depict the pre-grasping and post-grasping situations. Although grasping
directions and wrist orientations are right, final grasps are unsuccessful due to either the offsets in the gripper locations or challenging object poses.

one grasp pose, they are rather handicapped if their chosen grasp
poses are infeasible due to these constraints. The FCN approach
is also limited not only by its inaccurate wrist orientation prediction but also by its overfitted grasping direction, and hence it is
easily affected by these constraints. This emphasizes the importance of model capability which is able to generalize to multiple
grasping directions, and it turns out that the 3DCNN approach is
more capable of grasping under these constraints.
Some successful grasps of our approach are shown in Fig. 8.
Our 3D CNN learns partial-view invariance from the training
data and generalizes to new objects. Moreover, we can see
the synergy effect between our CNN grasping prediction and
soft hands. Thanks to the compliance of the soft hands, the

acquisition region of the soft hands for successful grasping is
large. This empowers the 3D CNN model to focus on learning
the coarsely sampled grasping directions and wrist orientations,
not worrying about other grasping parameters such as detailed
shapes of objects, minor offsets in hand pose, or more complex hand control. Although the grasping directions and wrist
orientations are coarsely discretized, our flexible soft hands
can grasp objects with a discrepancy in orientation. We also
notice the importance of guided grasping direction and wrist
orientation information for the soft hands. Fig. 9 shows some
unsuccessful grasps of the RAND approach. Even though our
soft hands are flexible and compliant, a good enough grasp
pose is an important prerequisite for successful grasping. By

Authorized licensed use limited to: Soongsil University. Downloaded on March 05,2026 at 12:02:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHOI et al.: LEARNING OBJECT GRASPING FOR SOFT ROBOT HANDS

comparing the accuracies of the 3DCNN and RAND approaches
in Fig. 7, we notice that the 3D CNN improves the grasping
performance of the soft hands by 72 percentage points. Some
failure cases of our approach are presented in Fig. 10. For each
object, two images depict the pre-grasping and post-grasping
situations to show how these grasps failed. Note that grasping
directions are correct, but the final grasps are unsuccessful due
to either the offsets in the gripper locations or challenging object
poses.
VI. CONCLUSION
A deep learning powered grasping approach was presented.
A 3D CNN model was trained with the dataset obtained by
executing grasping with soft hands. Our soft hands with the
3D CNN model achieved 87% successful grasping on unknown
objects, which outperforms the other compared approaches including one other deep neural network baseline. We noticed the
synergy between our CNN grasping algorithm and soft hands.
Our compliant soft hands were able to perform reliable grasping
with the grasp poses determined by our CNN model, and the
grasp prediction by the CNN significantly increased the success
rate by about 72 percentage points compared to the approach
without the 3D CNN-based grasp prediction.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Bohg, A. Morales, T. Asfour, and D. Kragic, “Data-driven grasp
synthesis–a survey,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 289–309,
Apr. 2014.
[2] A. T. Miller and P. K. Allen, “Graspit! A versatile simulator for robotic
grasping,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Mag., vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 110–122,
Dec. 2004.
[3] I. Lenz, H. Lee, and A. Saxena, “Deep learning for detecting robotic
grasps,” Int. J. Robot. Res., vol. 34, no. 4–5, pp. 705–724, Apr. 2015.
[Online]. Available: http://ijr.sagepub.com/content/34/4-5/705
[4] R. Deimel and O. Brock, “A novel type of compliant and underactuated robotic hand for dexterous grasping,” Int. J. Robot. Res.,
vol. 35, no. 1–3, pp. 161–185, Jan. 2016. [Online]. Available:
http://ijr.sagepub.com/content/35/1-3/161
[5] C. Choi, J. DelPreto, and D. Rus, “Using vision for pre- and post-grasping
object localization for soft hands,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Exp. Robot., Tokyo,
Japan, 2016, pp. 601–612.
[6] A. Gupta, C. Eppner, S. Levine, and P. Abbeel, “Learning dexterous
manipulation for a soft robotic hand from human demonstrations,” in Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., 2016, pp. 3786–3793. [Online].
Available: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/7759557/
[7] A. Sahbani, S. El-Khoury, and P. Bidaud, “An overview of 3d
object grasp synthesis algorithms,” Robot. Auton. Syst., vol. 60,
no. 3, pp. 326–336, 2012. [Online]. Available: http://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0921889011001485
[8] C. Goldfeder, M. Ciocarlie, J. Peretzman, H. Dang, and P. K. Allen,
“Data-driven grasping with partial sensor data,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., 2009, pp. 1278–1283. [Online]. Available:
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpls/abs_all.jsp?arnumber=5354078
[9] J. Weisz and P. K. Allen, “Pose error robust grasping from contact wrench space metrics,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., 2012, pp. 557–562. [Online]. Available: http://ieeexplore.ieee.
org/xpls/abs_all.jsp?arnumber=6224697
[10] A. Collet, M. Martinez, and S. S. Srinivasa, “The MOPED framework:
Object recognition and pose estimation for manipulation,” Int. J. Robot.
Res., vol. 30, no. 10, pp. 1284–1306, 2011.
[11] C. Choi and H. I. Christensen, “RGB-D object pose estimation in unstructured environments,” Robot. Auton. Syst., vol. 75,
pp. 595–613, 2016. [Online]. Available: http://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0921889015002158

2377

[12] K. Huebner and D. Kragic, “Selection of robot pre-grasps using
box-based shape approximation,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst., 2008, pp. 1765–1770. [Online]. Available: http://ieeexplore.
ieee.org/xpls/abs_all.jsp?arnumber=4650722
[13] M. Przybylski, T. Asfour, and R. Dillmann, “Unions of balls for
shape approximation in robot grasping,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., 2010, pp. 1592–1599. [Online]. Available:
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpls/abs_all.jsp?arnumber=5653520
[14] A. Saxena, J. Driemeyer, and A. Y. Ng, “Robotic grasping of novel objects
using vision,” Int. J. Robot. Res., vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 157–173, 2008.
[Online]. Available: http://ijr.sagepub.com/content/27/2/157.short
[15] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “Imagenet classification with deep convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. 25th Int. Conf.
Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2012, pp. 1097–1105. [Online]. Available:
http://papers.nips.cc/paper/4824-imagenet-classification-w
[16] D. Kappler, J. Bohg, and S. Schaal, “Leveraging big data
for grasp planning,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom.,
2015, pp. 4304–4311. [Online]. Available: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/
xpls/abs_all.jsp?arnumber=7139793
[17] J. Varley, J. Weisz, J. Weiss, and P. Allen, “Generating multi-fingered
robotic grasps via deep learning,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst., 2015, pp. 4415–4420.
[18] J. Mahler et al., “Dex-net 1.0: A cloud-based network of 3D objects for
robust grasp planning using a multi-armed bandit model with correlated rewards,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., May 2016, pp. 1957–1964.
[Online]. Available: http://goldberg.berkeley.edu/pubs/icra16-submittedDex-Net.pdf
[19] L. Pinto and A. Gupta, “Supersizing self-supervision: Learning to grasp
from 50 k tries and 700 robot hours,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot.
Autom., 2016, pp. 3406–3413. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/
1509.06825
[20] M. Gualtieri, A. t. Pas, K. Saenko, and R. Platt, “High precision grasp pose
detection in dense clutter,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots
Syst., 2016, pp. 598–605.
[21] E. Johns, S. Leutenegger, and A. J. Davison, “Deep learning a grasp
function for grasping under gripper pose uncertainty,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ
Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., 2016, pp. 4461–4468.
[22] S. Levine, P. Pastor, A. Krizhevsky, and D. Quillen, “Learning hand-eye
coordination for robotic grasping with deep learning and large-scale data
collection,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Exp. Robot., 2016. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1603.02199
[23] J. Mahler et al., “Dex-net 2.0: Deep learning to plan robust grasps with
synthetic point clouds and analytic grasp metrics,” in Proc. Robot.: Sci.
Syst., 2017.
[24] Z. Wu et al., “3d ShapeNets: A deep representation for volumetric
shapes,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vision Pattern Recognit., June
2015, pp. 1912–1920.
[25] D. Maturana and S. Scherer, “VoxNet: A 3D convolutional neural network for real-time object recognition,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., 2015, pp. 922–928. [Online]. Available:
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpls/abs_all.jsp?arnumber=7353481
[26] A. M. Dollar and R. D. Howe, “The highly adaptive SDM hand: Design and
performance evaluation,” Int. J. Robot. Res., vol. 29, no. 5, pp. 585–597,
2010. [Online]. Available: http://ijr.sagepub.com/content/29/5/585.short
[27] B. S. Homberg, R. K. Katzschmann, M. R. Dogar, and D. Rus, “Haptic identification of objects using a modular soft robotic gripper,” in
Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., Sep. 2015, pp. 1698–
1705.
[28] R. Balasubramanian, L. Xu, P. D. Brook, J. R. Smith, and Y. Matsuoka,
“Human-guided grasp measures improve grasp robustness on physical
robot,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., May 2010, pp. 2294–
2301.
[29] V. Sze, Y. H. Chen, T. J. Yang, and J. S. Emer, “Efficient processing of
deep neural networks: A tutorial and survey,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 105, no. 12,
pp. 2295–2329, Dec. 2017.
[30] S. Christoph Stein, M. Schoeler, J. Papon, and F. Worgotter, “Object
partitioning using local convexity,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vision
Pattern Recognit., 2014, pp. 304–311. [Online]. Available: http://www.cvfoundation.org/openaccess/content_cvpr_2014/html/Stein_Object_Partitioning_using_2014_CVPR_paper.html
[31] A. Ecins, C. Fermller, and Y. Aloimonos, “Cluttered scene segmentation
using the symmetry constraint,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom.,
2016, pp. 2271–2278.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Soongsil University. Downloaded on March 05,2026 at 12:02:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

