IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON MECHATRONICS, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2017

41

Visual Servoing of Soft Robot Manipulator
in Constrained Environments With
an Adaptive Controller
Hesheng Wang, Senior Member, IEEE, Bohan Yang, Yuting Liu,
Weidong Chen, Xinwu Liang, and Rolf Pfeifer

Abstract—It is unavoidable for a soft manipulator to
interact with environments during some tasks. These interactions may affect the soft manipulator and make the kinematic model different from the one in free space, e.g., the
soft manipulator’s effective length and the target positions
might change. In order to apply the soft manipulator to constrained environments, an adaptive visual servo controller
based on piecewise-constant curvature kinematic, without
knowing the true values of the manipulator’s length and the
target positions, is proposed in this paper. Experimental
results in the free space, constrained environment, and the
gravity-influenced environment, demonstrate the convergence of the image errors under the proposed controller.
Index Terms—Adaptive control, soft manipulator, visual
servo.

I. INTRODUCTION
N RECENT years, the field of soft robotics has received a
lot of attention from both scientists and engineers interested
in adaptive behavior and biological forms of intelligence. One
of the main reasons for this development is that often “fast,

I

Manuscript received April 18, 2016; revised July 2, 2016; accepted
September 7, 2016. Date of publication September 26, 2016; date of current version February 14, 2017. Recommended by Technical Editor B.
Daachi. This work was supported in part by the Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 61473191, Grant 61503245, Grant 61221003,
and Grant 61673272, in part by the Science and Technology Commission of Shanghai Municipality under Grant 15111104802, in part by the
Shanghai Sailing Program under Grant 15YF1406300, and in part by
the State Key Laboratory of Robotics and System (HIT). (Corresponding
author: Weidong Chen.)
H. Wang is with the Department of Automation, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai 200240, China, also with the Key Laboratory of
System Control and Information Processing, Ministry of Education of
China, Shanghai 200240, China, and also with the State Key Laboratory
of Robotics and System, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin 150001,
China (e-mail: wanghesheng@sjtu.edu.cn).
B. Yang, Y. Liu, W. Chen, and R. Pfeifer are with the Department of
Automation, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China,
and also with the Key Laboratory of System Control and Information
Processing, Ministry of Education of China, Shanghai 200240, China
(e-mail: ashily_220@126.com; 1648169992@qq.com; wdchen@sjtu.
edu.cn; pfeifer@ifi.uzh.ch).
X. Liang is with the School of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China (e-mail: xinwu113@
163.com).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available
online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMECH.2016.2613410

efficient, and robust behavior can be achieved by adequately exploiting material properties in particular softness” [1]. Because
the soft materials passively adapt to their environment, soft and
continuum robots are especially suited for certain types of tasks,
such as moving over uneven terrain, coping with impact, grasping hard things or objects of different shapes and interacting with
humans in everyday situations that would be difficult for traditional robots with rigid links and joints [2]. Because biological
systems consist largely of soft materials, nature provides a lot
of inspiration. Researchers have attempted to imitate a number
of creatures, e.g., the robotic elephant trunk manipulator [3] and
the OctArm continuum manipulator [4]. Based on an analysis
of the morphological features of the octopus arm (connective
tissue, arm density, transverse muscles, longitudinal muscles),
Laschi, Mazzolai and their groups designed the octopus soft
robot arm [5], [6].
However, opportunities and challenges are brought to us simultaneously. First, the adaptable property comes with load limitation. Runge et al. proposed a spine-like manipulator inspired
by the still endoskeletons of the larger animals. They enveloped
rigid elements and soft elements in a silicone skin [7]. Second, accurate position control has been easily accomplished by
rigid robots through electrical motors, while this could hardly
been done by a soft robot. Morgan et al. found a compromising
way in robot design by keeping a joint-like structure with soft
actuation [8].
Pure soft robots are studied as well. Because a soft and continuum manipulator has an infinite number of degrees of freedom,
control is the key challenge and has led to several substantial
publications. For example, Duriez presented a finite element
method model to have the robot follow a given position in
real-time without using the external sensors [9]. Rigatos did
a comparison between the model-based and model-free control
methods for continuum robots [10].
Piecewise constant curvature kinematics, an approximation
of the continuum and soft robot kinematics model, has been
widely used in a variety of control tasks. For example, Webster
and Jones made a review of kinematic modeling for continuum
robots [11]. To improve the accuracy of the kinematics model,
Giorelli et al. presented a feed-forward neural network learning method to deal with the inverse kinetics elements calculation for a cable-driven nonconstant curvature soft manipulator.

1083-4435 © 2016 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Soongsil University. Downloaded on March 05,2026 at 11:54:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

42

IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON MECHATRONICS, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2017

Because there are small differences between all the individual
soft manipulators, they all had to be trained separately in order
to represent the relation between the position of the robot tip and
the cables’ output force [12]. Qi et al. introduced a linearized
continuum robot state-space model and presented a fuzzy logic
controller to manage the position error feedback [13].
As the traditional control method, soft robot dynamics were
also studied by some researchers. Rone and Ben-Tzvi used a
finite set of kinematic variables to describe the curvature variations of a continuum robot segment. Based on the principle
of virtual power, they built a dynamic model that includes actuation, friction, elastic, inertial, and gravitational effects [14].
Renda et al. developed a geometrically approached dynamic
model, which accounted for the coupled tendon condition as
well as the interaction with a dense medium, for a cable-driven
continuum soft robot [15]. Incorporating the force effects makes
the dynamics model more accurate than the kinematics modeling methodology. However, the increase of the model accuracy
entails higher computational complexity. The cost of the simplicity made the real-time control of the robot difficult. Because
of the present reason, position and shape control with the dynamic model have not been used widely by the continuum or soft
robot researchers. Based on the physical model, Camarillo et al.
developed another model for tendon-driven continuum manipulators, in which the redundant tendon system is characterized as
a rotational spring and the linear displacement springs system is
used to represent the relationship between the coupled tendons.
They also embedded the model in a tendon position controller
which implemented an optimal feasible methodology [16].
Some researchers also have proposed model-free approaches
to the soft and continuum robot control. Vikas et al. presented a
four-step process of discretization, visualization, learning, and
optimization, instead of the traditional-model-based methodology, to control the multilimbed soft material robots. However,
this state-to-state control could not be applied to complicated
configurations (such as cable-driven soft robots), because the
numerous states have to be taken into account [17].
Generally speaking, trying to incorporate information about
the surroundings into control models has proved inefficient,
especially if the environment is changing continuously. Therefore, the solution might be to do entirely without environmental
modeling, instead of equipping the robot with perceptual abilities. Environment perception is a popular research direction for
the soft and continuum robot. Recently, sensor-based control
has attracted the attention of many researchers. There are many
groups, including ourselves, that have studied vision-based
position control. We presented a kinematic model based method
to deal with cable-driven soft robot position and orientation
control. A depth-independent image Jacobian matrix was used
in the image-based visual servo controller in free space [18].
Girard et al. designed a two degree of freedom dielectric
elastomer sensor to feedback the accurate position of soft robot
[19]. Using a force and a visual sensor, Kesner et al. presented
a single degree of freedom servoing system for cardiac surgery.
An ultrasound visual servoing system was designed to track the
heart motion. An extended Kalman filter was used to estimate
the cardiac motion, so that the image acquisition and processing
delay could be compensated. This work constitutes a significant

attempt at soft robot real-time automatic control by applying
external sensors. They also designed a homemade force sensor
with an embedded fiber optic displacement sensor, which
can convert the displacement to the force value by nonlinear
calibration. The inner position loop force control approach was
used to do the single freedom force control too [20], [21]. Xu
et al. presented a proximal force sensor-based algorithm to
compensate the deflection caused by the external disturbances
in real-time position control [22].
Self-perception is another important research direction. To
finish a task in a sophisticated unknown environment, the shape
information of the robot is also important for the accuracy of
the robotic control. Shape estimation is a great challenge for
the researchers. Rone and Ben-Tzvi described a cable-driven
continuum shape estimation model without using external sensing. Based on the principle of virtual power, they showed how
an optimization procedure can estimate the continuum robot
configuration by utilizing the measured displacements of the
cables to estimate the continuum robot configuration [23]. Tully
et al. presented a shape estimation algorithm with the information provided by a magnetic tracking sensor, which was situated
at the distal end of the highly articulated robotic probe [24].
Chathuranga et al. proposed a shape sensing method based on
the electroconductive yarn. Both bending and elongation behaviors could be measured in a real-time by this embedded sensor
system [25]. The structure and the control method of soft robots
and continuum robots were very similar. However, the flexibility
of the soft robot was better, because no segment structure was
in the soft robot. In the complex environment, e.g., surgery, the
soft robot could be adaptive to the body environment with no
harm.
To sum up, most studies so far have been focusing on free
space or unconstrained environments, e.g., an underwater surrounding, without taking into account the interaction with the
external environment (i.e., forces, friction, gravity). Because soft
robots are—obviously—soft, they are more strongly influenced
by the environment than a rigid robot. In practical applications,
soft robots could not work in free space; they tend to be affected by the external physical environment. These constraints
will affect the morphology (e.g., the length) of the soft robot
manipulator, resulting in modeling error, and may as a consequence lead to undesired control behavior. For these problems,
some researchers start to deal with trajectory planning for soft
robots. Fellmann et al. presented four different trajectory generation strategies for the tubular continuum robot to finish the
collision-free path planning task. They also tried to verify these
strategies in a virtual medical scenario, which was a segmented
computed-tomography dataset of an adult skull [26]. Yip and
Camarillo introduced a novel control strategy for tendon-driven
continuum robots, which were designed to operate in unknown
constrained environments. Instead of the traditional geometric
based kinematic model, they employed an optimal control strategy to extract and continuously update the relation between the
actuator inputs and the end-effector position. A tip-constraints
condition was also considered. Their method was leveraged by
an eye-to-hand position control experiment [27], [28].
However, we focus on a new question of unknown “stuck”
position. When a soft robot is used as a surgical robot or a

Authorized licensed use limited to: Soongsil University. Downloaded on March 05,2026 at 11:54:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: VISUAL SERVOING OF SOFT ROBOT MANIPULATOR IN CONSTRAINED ENVIRONMENTS WITH AN ADAPTIVE CONTROLLER

Fig. 1.

43

Cable-driven soft robotic manipulator.

rescue robot, a crowded environment might influence the state
of the robot. If this place happens to be the operation location,
unknown stuck point would bring the manipulator to an embarrassment. In order to make the soft robot manipulator applicable
to constrained environments, an adaptive visual servo control
method is proposed based on a piecewise constant curvature
hypothesis with the vision feedback of the endoscope mounted
on the end-effector. It could estimate the effective length of
the robot manipulator and the target positions online, even if
the soft robot manipulator was wedged somewhere by an unknown obstacle. In order to verify the validity of the control
algorithm in constrained environments, three real-world experiments were conducted on a cable-driven soft robot manipulator
under three conditions, such as free movement, narrow constraints, and gravity effects. The corresponding experimental
results are analyzed, which confirmed the performance of the
proposed method.
II. KINEMATICS
The manipulator studied in this paper is a cable-driven soft
robot manipulator made up of silicone rubber. As shown in
Fig. 1, the current prototype is cone-shaped. An endoscope camera is embedded inside the manipulator along the center axis.
Four cables are uniformly distributed near the outer surface of
the manipulator and run through the whole body. One side of
these cables is tied to a ring embedded in the tip. By pulling
the other end of these cables, the entire soft manipulator will be
bent.
The following kinematics and differential kinematics could be
obtained based on a piecewise constant curvature hypothesis that
was introduced in our previous work [18]. We could represent
a 4 × 4 homogeneous transformation matrix i−1 Ti (q) between
two neighbor sections of the ith segment as follows.
In this paper we would specify scalar to be in italic, while
vector in bold. Matrix would appear in capitals, while vector is

Fig. 2.

Eye-in-hand system of soft manipulator.

Fig. 3. ith segment of soft manipulator. Cables are shown as blue lines,
while the curve plane is presented as red lines.

in lower case, see (1) shown at the bottom of this page, where
q is the 4-dimensional (4-D) vector of the length of the driven
cable. φi , θ i , ri , as shown in Fig. 3, are virtual joint variables
of the ith segment and are represented by q.
Applying the chain rule to all n segments, we have the homogeneous transformation between the base plane and the endeffector plane as
e

Tb (q) = 0 T1 1 T2 , . . . , n −1 Tn

e
Rb (q) e pb (q)
=
0
1

(2)

and the differential kinematics of the soft robotic manipulator
could be represented as
 
v
dq
= J(q)
(3)
dt
w

⎡ 2
c φi (cθi − 1) + 1 sφi cφi (cθi − 1)
cφi sθ
⎢
⎢ sφi cφi (cθi − 1) s2 φi (cθi − 1) + 1 sφi sθi
⎢
i−1
T i (q) = ⎢
⎢
−cφi sθi
−sφi sθi
cθi
⎣
0
0
0

−ri cφi (cθi − 1)

⎤

⎥
−ri sφi (cθi − 1) ⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
ri sθi
⎦
1

Authorized licensed use limited to: Soongsil University. Downloaded on March 05,2026 at 11:54:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(1)

44

IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON MECHATRONICS, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2017

where e Tb (q) represents a 4 × 4 homogeneous transformation matrix from the base frame to the end-effector frame. The
subscript and superscript represent three coordinate frames of
the base frame, the end-effector frame and the camera frame;
[vT , wT ]T are the velocities of the end-effector; dq/dt is the
rate of change of the length of the driven cable; J(q) represents a 6 × 4 Jacobian matrix describing the velocity mapping
between the Cartesian space and driving space.
The setup of the eye-in-hand system of our soft manipulator is shown in Fig. 2. Let c Te (q) denote the homogeneous
transformation matrix from the end-effector frame to the camera frame. Since the camera is fixed to the end-effector of the
robot manipulator, c Te (q) is a constant matrix. Suppose there
is a target point in the field of view of the camera and its 4-D
homogeneous world coordinate is b x. Let y denote the 2-D homogeneous image coordinates of the target point on the image
plane, and according to the perspective projection model
 
y
1
1
Ωc Te (q)e Tb (q)b x =
Me x
(4)
=
z
(q)
z(q)
1
where z(q) is the depth of the target point in the camera frame;
Ω is the 3 × 4 intrinsic parameter matrix of the camera and
it is a constant matrix; M = Ωc Te (q) is the 3 × 4 projection
matrix; e x(t) is the 4-D homogeneous coordinate of the target
point w.r.t. the end-effector frame. The decomposition of M is:
M= [m1 , m2 , m3 ]T = [PT , m3 ]T , then (4) can be rewritten as
y=

1
Pe x
z(q)

e
z (q) = mT
3 x.

(5)
(6)

By differentiating (5) and (6), we could obtain the target
velocity on the image plane as
 
v
•
1
y =
A(y, q)
(7)
z(q)
w
 
v
•
z(t) = b(q)
(8)
w
where A(y, q) is the 2 × 6 depth-independent interaction matrix proposed in our early work. b(q) is a 6-D vector. Matrixes
A(y, q) and b(q) could be written in the following concrete
forms [18]:


e
b
e
−I
skew(
R
(q)
x+
p
(q))
3×3
b
b
A(y, q) = (P − ymT
3)
01×3
01×3
e

Rb (q)
0
×
(9)
e
0
Rb (q)


−I3×3 skew(e Rb (q)b x+e pb (q))
T
b(q) = m3
01×3
01×3
e

Rb (q)
0
×
.
(10)
e
0
Rb (q)

By substituting (3) into (7) and (8), following the velocity
relationship between joint space and image space could be obtained:
•

y =

•
•
1
A(y, q)J(q) q = JT (q) q
z(q)

•

•

z(q) = b(q)J(q) q .

(11)

III. VISUAL SERVOING OF SOFT ROBOT MANIPULATOR
A. Extraction of Visual Servoing Problem
The objective of visual servoing is to generate a control signal
to move the robot manipulator based on the feedback of image
errors, i.e., the deviations between the desired image point position and the actual image position, so that the projection of the
target point will converge to the desired position on the image
plane.
In some narrow environments, the movement of the robot
manipulator is constrained. The range of motion is small, and it
may even be unable to move if some parts along the soft body
are “stuck” somewhere. For instance, a soft cable-driven robot
could be used as a surgical robot for some special operations. It
might be stuck by the crowded organs environment. If this place
happens to be the operation location, unknown stuck point would
bring the manipulator to an embarrassment. This raises two
issues.
Issue 1: In a sense, the soft manipulator get “shorter,” i.e., L
becomes smaller, because these “stuck” parts cannot move.
Issue 2: The base frame of the soft manipulator has changed.
This change is equivalent to a change in the target point position
w.r.t. the base frame of the robot, i.e., b x.
Because the shape of the robot manipulator is now different,
the stuck point could be considered as the new base of the
soft robot manipulator. However, “the new base frame” cannot
not be directly known because the exact position of where it
is stuck is unknown. In fact, the target point and the world
frame are fixed, but the relationship between the base frame
and target has changed. Accordingly, the target position b x and
the length L of the robot manipulator cannot be accurately
known.
B. Controller Design
Since there are uncertainties in the model parameters a =
[b xT , L]T , the traditional Proportional–Derivative control may
not achieve satisfactory results and convergence behavior. By
analyzing the kinematic (11), A(y, q)J(q) and b(q)J(q) could
be linearized by the unknown parameter vector a by assuming
that the sectional radius of the soft robot manipulator Rm ax ≈
Rm in (i.e., the soft robot manipulator is cylindrical). The accuracy of our model is sacrificed to reduce the computational
complexity. Also the simplification guarantees a linear model,
which is very important for the following derivation. Therefore,
these parameters can be estimated by the adaptive method. A
feedback control based on the traditional method is designed as

Authorized licensed use limited to: Soongsil University. Downloaded on March 05,2026 at 11:54:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: VISUAL SERVOING OF SOFT ROBOT MANIPULATOR IN CONSTRAINED ENVIRONMENTS WITH AN ADAPTIVE CONTROLLER

45

T
1
= − ΔyT K1 AT (y, q) + bT (q)ΔyT J(q)JT (q)
2
1
•
× ÂT (y, q) + b̂T (q)ΔyT K1 Δy + ΔaT K2 Δ a
2
•

= − ΔyT K1 DT J(q)JT (q)D̂K1 Δy + ΔaT K2 Δ a
= − ΔyT K1 (DT − D̂T )J(q)JT (q)D̂K1 Δy
Fig. 4.

•

− ΔyT K1 D̂T J(q)JT (q)D̂K1 Δy + ΔaT K2 Δ a

Block diagram of visual servoing control algorithm.

(17)
follows:

where

•

q = −JT (q)ÂT (y, q)K1 Δy
1
− JT (q)b̂T (q)ΔyT K1 Δy
2
Δy = y − yd

1
D = AT (y, q) + bT (q)ΔyT .
2
Substituting (14) into (17) and by simplification
(12)

where q are the control inputs, i.e., the length of the driven
cables; K1 is the 2 × 2 control gain; yd is the desired position
on the image plane. Δy is the image error. Â(y, q) and b̂(q)
are the estimated values of A(y, q) and b(q), respectively, let
1
∂
JT (q)AT (y,q)K1 Δy + JT (q)bT (q)ΔyT K1 Δy
∂a
2
1
− JT (q)AT (y,q)K1 Δy − JT (q)bT (q)ΔyT K1 Δy
2
= Y(y,q).
(13)
Following the adaptive law is developed similarly to the
Slotine–Li approach as
•

•

T
q
â = −K−1
2 Y (y, q)

(14)

where K2 is the 4 × 4 control gain.
A block diagram of the algorithm is shown in Fig. 4.
C. Convergence Analysis
To prove the stability of the system, the following Lyapunov
candidate has been designed:
1
1
V = ΔyT K1 z(q)Δy+ ΔaT K2 Δa
2
2
Δa = â − a.

(15)
(16)

By differentiating (15) and substituting (11), (12) into it, we
could obtain
•
1
•
V = ΔyT K1 z(q)ẏ + ΔyT K1 ż(q)Δy + ΔaT K2 Δ a
2
1
A(y, q)J(q)(−JT (q)ÂT (y, q)K1 Δy
= ΔyT K1 z(q)
z(q)

1
1
− JT (q)b̂T (q)ΔyT K1 Δy) + ΔyT K1 b(q)J(q)
2
2
×

− JT (q)ÂT (y, q)K1 Δy

1
•
− JT (q)b̂T (q)ΔyT K1 Δy Δy + ΔaT K2 Δ a
2

•

(18)

V = − Δy K1 D̂ J(q)J (q)D̂K1 Δy
T

T

T

− ΔyT K1 (DT − D̂T )J(q)JT (q)D̂K1 Δy
+ ΔaT K2 − K−1
2

∂ T
(J (q)AT (y, q)K1 Δy
∂a

1
+ JT (q)bT (q)ΔyT K1 Δy − JT (q)AT (y, q)K1 Δy
2
T
1
− JT (q)bT (q)ΔyT K1 Δy) JT (q)ÂT (y, q)K1 Δy
2

1
+ JT (q)b̂T (q)ΔyT K1 Δy
2
= − ΔyT K1 D̂T J(q)JT (q)D̂K1 Δy
− ΔyT K1 (DT − D̂T )J(q)JT (q)D̂K1 Δy
1
+ JT (q)AT (y, q)K1 Δy + JT (q)bT (q)ΔyT K1 Δy
2
T
1
− JT (q)AT (y, q)K1 Δy− JT (q)bT (q)ΔyT K1 Δy
2
1
× JT (q)ÂT (y, q)K1 Δy+ JT (q)b̂T (q)ΔyT K1 Δy
2
= − ΔyT K1 D̂T J(q)JT (q)D̂K1 Δy ≤ 0.

(19)

By Babrrat’s Lemma, it could be concluded that
lim JT (q)D̂Δy = 0.

t→∞

(20)

We assume that J(q) is a full rank matrix, i.e., the robot does
not work in singularity space. Since the rank of matrix D̂ is 2
[29]–[31], according to the invariant set theorem, Δy → 0 as
t → ∞. Therefore, the asymptotic convergence of the controller
is proved.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
A. Experimental Platform
The whole system design includes a rectilinear system, a rotation system, and a soft robot manipulator [32]. In this paper,
the structure has been simplified. We remove the previous two
systems and keep the soft manipulator part. The base of the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Soongsil University. Downloaded on March 05,2026 at 11:54:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

46

IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON MECHATRONICS, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2017

Fig. 5. Experimental setup: (a) full size of setup; (b) motors and control
board; and (c) soft manipulators.

Fig. 7.

Fig. 6.

Experimental results in free space: (a) trajectory; (b) error curve.

robot has been fixed in a table, as shown in Fig. 5(a). We focused on the robot ability of turn and curve. The full size of
experimental platform is shown in Fig. 5(a), which includes
a motor control board and four motors. Details of the control
part are shown in Fig. 5(b). Four motors (SR431, Spring Model
Electronics Inc., China) are connected to four cables. The total
length of the soft manipulator is L = 0.32 m, the maximum
cross-sectional radius is about Rm ax = 0.015 m, the minimum
radius is Rm in = 0.003 m. An endoscope camera is embedded
in the middle of the soft robot manipulator, as shown in Fig. 5(c).
B. Experiments and Results
a) Free Space Experiment: In the first experiment, the
initial posture of the soft robot manipulator is vertical, it will
be controlled in free space [18]. The initial state of the soft
robot manipulator is shown in Fig. 5. The desired position on
the image plane is set as [50, 50]T pixels, the control gains are
K1 = 7.5 × 10−8 I4 and K2 = 350I4 . The experimental results
are shown in Fig. 6. The convergence process is presented in
Fig. 6(a). The parameter u in the result figure is the image
position in x-axis, while v is the image position in y-axis. Δu
is the image position error along x-axis, while Δv presents the
image position error along y-axis.
Finally, the end-effector follows the desire point. And the
convergence speed along both x-axis and y-axis could be seen

Soft manipulators constrained by bracket.

in Fig. 6(b). This experiment is used as a contrast for the next
experiments.
b) Constrained Environment Experiment.: In the second experiment, the initial posture of the soft robot manipulator
is also vertical, but this time, it will be controlled in constrained
environments.
As shown in Fig. 7, a point in the middle of the soft robot
manipulator is fixed by a ring-shaped object to simulate the
restricted environment. The whole body of the soft robot manipulator is split into two parts, A and B, by this point. It can be
approximately assumed that the upper part A above this point
is kept stationary; the movement of lower part B is not affected
by part A. Thus, the length LB of B segment, which is unknown, could be considered as the effective length of the robot
manipulator.
Unlike the rigid arm, visual servoing of the soft robot manipulator is more susceptible to uncertainties, such as tensile deformation of driven cables, friction impact between the driven
cables and silicone rubber. These uncertainties make it difficult
for the soft robot manipulator to return to the same state as in
the previous experiment.
To study the impact of uncertainties in experiments as well
as verify the validity of experimental results, several repetitive
experiments under the same experimental conditions and control
parameters have been conducted. The experimental parameters
are listed in Table I.
The experiment results of target tracking in constrained environment are shown in Fig. 8. The convergence processes of the
three experiments are shown in Fig. 8(a). And the convergence

Authorized licensed use limited to: Soongsil University. Downloaded on March 05,2026 at 11:54:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: VISUAL SERVOING OF SOFT ROBOT MANIPULATOR IN CONSTRAINED ENVIRONMENTS WITH AN ADAPTIVE CONTROLLER

47

TABLE I
PARAMETERS IN REPETITIVE EXPERIMENTS
K 1 / × 10 −8

K2

LB /cm

y d /pixel

y(0)/pixel

3.5I 2

I4

15

[160; 100]

250; 170]

Fig. 9. Experimental results in constrained environment: (a) trajectories; (b) error curves. The number after each parameter shows the
experiment serial number.

Fig. 8.

Repetitive experimental results: (a) trajectories; (b) error curves.

TABLE II
PARAMETERS AND ITERATIVE STEPS IN CONTRAST EXPERIMENTS
Experiment
I
II
III

K 1 / × 10 −8

K2

LB /cm

y d /pixel

steps

6.5I 4
3.5I 4
3.5I 4

350I 4
350I 4
350I 4

15
15
5

[160; 100]
[160; 100]
[160; 100]

255
299
570

speed along x-axis and y-axis is shown in Fig. 8(b). It takes more
time to following the target point than the free space experiment.
Moreover, the trajectories of these three experiments are substantially coincident. The repeatability of these experiments has
been well verified.
To study the influence of the control parameters and the
constrained location (length LB ) on the movement of the soft
robot manipulator, two comparative experiments have been conducted. First, length LB is fixed, the value of K1 is adjusted to
study the influence of the control parameters (experiments I and
II). Parameter K1 is set to 6.5I2 in experiment I, while in the
experiment II this parameter is settled to 3.5I2 . In experiment
I and experiment II, the ring is stuck to the same place, so that
LB is unchanged. Second, the control K1 is fixed to 3.5I2 , the
length LB is adjusted to study the effect of the constrained environment (experiments II and III). In experiment II, segment B
is 15 cm long. And this length is changed to 5 cm in experiment
III. Specific parameters and iteration number (converged to the
target position) are listed in Table II.
Experimental trace and the error curve are shown in Fig. 9.
We could learn from the results that I (255 steps) converges to
the desired position faster than II (299 steps), and the absolute
value of the slope of the error curve is greater than that of II.

However, two issues may appear if K1 is too large: the dynamic
performance may be affected and the target point may leave the
field of view of the camera easily. K1 is the proportional gain of
feedback image errors. At the beginning, image errors are large
and the elements in Jacobian matrix J(q) are also very large.
Therefore, the value of matrix K1 should be chosen carefully,
typically between 3.0 ∼ 8.0 × 10−8 I4 in our experiments.
As can be seen from the error curve in Figs. 6 and 8, when
the soft robot manipulator is moving in free space, its range
of motion is significantly larger than that in constrained environments. The change of length and the base frame influence
the performance of the tracking task. Further qualitative analysis with more comparison leads us to design the other experiments. This indicates that the movement of the manipulator
is restricted by the environments, which raises the following
issues. Comparing the error curves of II and III in Fig. 9, it
should be noted that it only takes 299 steps to converge to the
desired position in II, whereas it takes 570 steps in III. This
shows that the more the restricted part is moved close to the
end-effector, i.e., the shorter the manipulator, the more the rate
of convergence slows down. The reason is that, when the robot
manipulator is free to move, the curvature needed to achieve the
desired position is much smaller compared to that in constrained
environments.
c) Horizontal Plane Experiment: In the third experiment,
the initial attitude of the soft robot manipulator is in the horizontal plane, so the gravity will also influence the experiment result.
The soft robot manipulator is tapped and a support platform is
placed close to the root of the manipulator, which makes the upper part of the manipulator float in the air (see Fig. 10). Comparative experiments by a controller without an adaptive algorithm
(IV) and a controller with an adaptive algorithm (V) have been
conducted, where the initial attitude of the soft robot manipulator is in the horizontal plane. In these experiments, the true
value of parameter a is a = [0.05, 0.16, 0.62, 0.17]T m; the
initial estimate one is a(0) = [0.001, 0.001, 0.62, 0.32]T m
which would not be adjusted in the nonadaptive experiment.
The values of the parameters are listed in Table III.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Soongsil University. Downloaded on March 05,2026 at 11:54:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

48

IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON MECHATRONICS, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2017

Fig. 10.

Soft manipulators lying on the table.

TABLE III
PARAMETERS IN CONTRAST EXPERIMENTS WITH GRAVITY DISTURBANCE
Experiment
IV
V

K 1 / × 10 −8

K2

y d /pixel

y(0)/pixel

5.5I 4
5.5I 4

350I 4
350I 4

[50;220]
[50; 220]

[294;39]
[240; 99]

Fig. 12. Experimental results with adaptive observer: (a) trajectory;
(b) error curves.

We proposed a visual control method for the soft robot to deal
with the unknown “stuck” situation, which might be met in a
practical real-world situation, e.g., surgical manipulation. The
actual length and target position would be estimated by our
method. Three experiments have been conducted to verify the
adaptability of the soft manipulator to the environment in free
space, constrained environments, and environments with the
influence of gravity, respectively. These experimental results
demonstrate that the soft robot manipulator could be applied
to the constrained environments with the proposed adaptive approach. It should also be noted that although the convergence
could be guaranteed in constrained environments, the convergence rate is relatively slow compared to that in free space environments. Finally, this paper also analyzes the influence of the
control parameters, the environment, and gravity to the control
performance.
REFERENCES

Fig. 11. Experimental results without adaptive observer: (a) trajectory;
(b) error curves.

The experimental results are plotted in Figs. 11 and 12.
In the third experiment, the effect of gravity makes the soft
manipulator droop, while limiting its movement in the vertical direction, so that the model becomes inaccurate. It failed to
converge in nonadaptive observer experiments IV (see Fig. 11),
while it eventually converges to the desired point in the experiment with an adaptive approach V (see Fig. 12).
V. CONCLUSION
Modeling and control of the soft robot manipulator are complicated due to the soft features, which also make the motion
ability of the soft robot manipulator susceptible to the external
environments. In this paper, a cable-driven soft robot manipulator has been studied. An adaptive visual servo control algorithm
has been proposed based on a kinematic model of the robot.

[1] R. Pfeifer, M. Lungarella, and F. Iida, “The challenges ahead for bioinspired ‘soft’ robotics,” Commun. ACM, vol. 55, no. 12, pp. 76–87,
2012.
[2] D. Rus and M. T. Tolley, “Design, fabrication and control of soft robots,”
Nature, vol. 521, no. 7553, pp. 467–475, 2015.
[3] M. W. Hannan and I. D. Walker, “Kinematics and the implementation
of an elephant’s trunk manipulator and other continuum style robots,” J.
Robot. Syst., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 45–63, 2003.
[4] W. McMahan et al., “Field trials and testing of the OctArm continuum
manipulator,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., 2006, pp. 2336–
2341.
[5] C. Laschi, B. Mazzolai, M. Cianchetti, L. Margheri, M. Follador, and
P. Dario, “A soft robot arm inspired by the octopus,” Adv. Robot., vol. 26,
no. 7, pp. 709–727, 2012.
[6] B. Mazzolai, L. Margheri, M. Cianchetti, P. Dario, and C. Laschi, “Soft
robotic arm inspired by the octopus: II. From artificial requirements to
innovative technological solutions,” Bioinspiration Biominetics, vol. 7,
no. 2, 2012, Art. no. 025005.
[7] G. Runge et al., “SpineMan: Design of a soft robotic spine-like manipulator for safe human-robot interaction,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst., 2015, pp. 1103–1110.
[8] M. T. Gillespie, C. M. Best, and M. D. Killpack, “Simultaneous position
and stiffness control for an inflatable soft robot,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robot. Autom., 2016, pp. 1095–1101.
[9] C. Duriez, “Control of elastic soft robots based on real-time finite element
method,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., 2013, pp. 3982–3987.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Soongsil University. Downloaded on March 05,2026 at 11:54:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: VISUAL SERVOING OF SOFT ROBOT MANIPULATOR IN CONSTRAINED ENVIRONMENTS WITH AN ADAPTIVE CONTROLLER

[10] G. G. Rigatos, “Model-based and model-free control of flexible-link
robots: A comparison between representative methods,” Appl. Math.
Model., vol. 33, no. 10, pp. 3906–3925, 2009.
[11] R. J. Webster and B. A. Jones, “Design and kinematic modeling of constant
curvature continuum robots: A review,” Int. J. Robot. Res., vol. 29, no. 13,
pp. 1661–1683, 2010.
[12] M. Giorelli, F. Renda, G. Ferri, and C. Laschi, “A feed-forward neural
network learning the inverse kinetics of a soft cable-driven manipulator
moving in three-dimensional space,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst., 2013, pp. 5033–5039.
[13] P. Qi, C. Liu, L. Zhang, S. Wang, H. K. Lam, and K. Althoefer, “Fuzzy
logic control of a continuum manipulator for surgical applications,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Biomimetics, 2014, pp. 413–418.
[14] W. Rone and P. Ben-Tzvi, “Continuum robot dynamics utilizing the principle of virtual power,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 275–287,
Feb. 2014.
[15] F. Renda, M. Giorelli, M. Calisti, M. Cianchetti, and C. Laschi, “Dynamic
model of a multibending soft robot arm driven by cables,” IEEE Trans.
Robot., vol. 30, no. 5, pp. 1109–1122, Oct. 2014.
[16] D. B. Camarillo, C. F. Milne, C. R. Carlson, M. R. Zinn, and J. K. Salisbury,
“Mechanics modeling of tendon-driven continuum manipulators,” IEEE
Trans. Robot., vol. 24, no. 6, pp. 1262–1273, Dec. 2008.
[17] V. Vikas, P. Grover, and B. Trimmer, “ Model-free control framework for
multi-limb soft robots,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.,
2015, pp. 1111–1116.
[18] H. Wang, W. Chen, X. Yu, T. Deng, X. Wang, and R. Pfeifer, “Visual servo
control of cable-driven soft robotic manipulator,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., Nov. 2013, pp. 57–62.
[19] A. Girard, J. P. L. Bigue, B. M. O’Brien, T. A. Gisby, I. A. Anderson,
and J. S. Plante, “Soft two-degree-of-freedom dielectric elastomer position sensor exhibiting linear behavior,” IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatronics,
vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 105–114, Feb. 2015.
[20] S. G. Yuen, S. B. Kesner, N. V. Vasilyev, P. J. del Nido, and R. D. Howe,
“3D ultrasound-guided motion compensation system for beating heart
mitral valve repair,” Med. Image Comput. Comput.-Assisted Intervention,
vol. 5241, pp. 711–719, 2008.
[21] S. B. Kesner and R. D. Howe, “Force control of flexible catheter robots
for beating heart surgery,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., 2011,
pp. 1589–1594.
[22] R. Xu, A. Asadian, S. F. Atashzar, and R. V. Patel, “Real-time trajectory
tracking for externally loaded concentric-tube robots,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robot. Autom., 2014, pp. 4374–4379.
[23] W. S. Rone and P. Ben-Tzvi, “Multi-segment continuum robot shape
estimation using passive cable displacement,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp.
Robot. Sens. Environ., 2013, pp. 37–42.
[24] S. Tully, G. Kantor, M. A. Zenati, and H. Choset, “Shape estimation
for image-guided surgery with a highly articulated snake robot,” in Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., 2011, pp. 1353–1358.
[25] H. A. Wurdemann et al., “Embedded electro-conductive yarn for shape
sensing of soft robotic manipulators,” in Proc. 37th Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE
Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2015, pp. 8026–8029.
[26] C. Fellmann and J. Burgner-Kahrs, “Implications of trajectory generation
strategies for tubular continuum robots,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intell. Robots Syst., 2015, pp. 202–208.
[27] M. C. Yip and D. B. Camarillo, “Model-less feedback control of continuum
manipulators in constrained environments,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 30,
no. 4, pp. 880–889, Aug. 2014.
[28] M. C. Yip and D. B. Camarillo, “Model-less hybrid position/force control: A minimalist approach for continuum manipulators in unknown, constrained environments,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 844–
851, Jul. 2016.
[29] Y. H. Liu, H. Wang, C. Wang, and K. Lam, “Uncalibrated visual servoing of
robots using a depth-independent interaction matrix,” IEEE Trans. Robot.,
vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 804–817, Aug. 2006.
[30] H. Wang, Y. H. Liu, and D. Zhou, “Adaptive visual servoing using point
and line features with an uncalibrated eye-in-hand camera,” IEEE Trans.
Robot., vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 843–857, Aug. 2008.
[31] H. Wang, Y. H. Liu, W. Chen, and Z. Wang, “A new approach to dynamic
eye-in-hand visual tracking using nonlinear observers,” IEEE/ASME
Trans. Mechatronics, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 387–394, Apr. 2011.
[32] R. Zhang, H. Wang, W. Chen, X. Wang, and R. Pfeifer, “Motion analysis and experimental study of a cable-driven soft surgical robot,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Cyber Technol. Autom. Control Intell. Syst., 2015,
pp. 2085–2090.

49

Hesheng Wang (SM’15) received the B.Eng.
degree in electrical engineering from the Harbin
Institute of Technology, Harbin, China, in 2002,
the M.Phil. and Ph.D. degrees in automation and
computer-aided engineering from the Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, in 2004
and 2007, respectively.
From 2007 to 2009, he was a Postdoctoral
Fellow and a Research Assistant in the Department of Mechanical and Automation Engineering, the Chinese University of Hong Kong. Since
2009, he has been with Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China, where
he is currently a Professor in the Department of Automation. He worked
as a Visiting Professor with the University of Zurich, Switzerland. His
research interests include visual servoing, service robot, robot control,
and computer vision.
Dr. Wang is an Associate Editor of Robotics and Biomimetics, Assembly Automation, International Journal of Humanoid Robotics, and IEEE
TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS. From 2011 to 2015, he served as an Associate Editor in the Conference Editorial Board of the IEEE Robotics and
Automation Society. He is actively involved in the organization of international conferences. He served as an organizing committee member for
many international conferences, such as ICRA and IROS. He was the
General Chair of the 2016 IEEE International Conference on Real-Time
Computing and Robotics and the Program Chair of the 2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Biomimetic. He is the Program
Chair of the 2019 IEEE/ASME International Conference on Advanced
Intelligent Mechatronics.

Bohan Yang received the B.S. degree in automation from Hunan University, Changsha,
China, in 2014. Since 2014, she has been working toward the M.S. degree in the Department
of Automation, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai, China.
Her research interests include visual servoing
and robot control.

Yuting Liu received the B.S. degree in control engineering from Beihang University, Beijing, China, in 2014. Since 2014, she has been
working toward the M.S. degree in control engineering at Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai, China.

Weidong Chen received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in control engineering, in 1990 and 1993,
and Ph.D. degree in mechatronics, in 1996,
respectively, all from the Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China.
Since 1996, he has been with Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, where he is currently the Head
and a Professor in the Department of Automation, and the Director of the Institute of Robotics
and Intelligent Processing.
He is the Founder of the Autonomous Robot
Laboratory, Shanghai Jiao Tong University. In 2012, he was a Visiting Professor in the Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, University of
Zurich, Switzerland. From 2016 until 2017, he is a Visiting Professor in the Brain Science Life Support Research Center, University of
Electro-Communications, Japan. His current research interests include
autonomous robotics, assistive robotics, and medical robotics.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Soongsil University. Downloaded on March 05,2026 at 11:54:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

50

IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON MECHATRONICS, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2017

Xinwu Liang received the B.S. and Ph.D. degrees in control engineering from Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan,
China, in 2006 and 2011, respectively.
From 2011 to 2014, he was a Postdoctoral
Fellow in the Department of Automation, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China, and
from 2014 to 2015, he was a Postdoctoral Fellow
in the Department of Mechanical and Automation Engineering, the Chinese University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong. He is currently an Associate
Professor in the School of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University. His current research interests include robot control, visual servoing, adaptive control, and computer vision.

Rolf Pfeifer received the Master’s degree in
physics in 1970, and mathematics and the Ph.D.
degree in computer science, in 1979, from the
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, Zurich,
Switzerland.
He is currently a Visiting Professor at Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China and a “Specially Appointed Professor” at Osaka University,
Japan. Moreover, he is a Co-Founder of the
National Robotics Centre, Switzerland. From
1987 to 2014, he was a Professor of computer
science at the University of Zurich and the Director of the Artificial Intelligence Laboratory. He was a Visiting Professor and a Research Fellow
at the Free University of Brussels, the MIT Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Cambridge, MA, USA, the Neurosciences Institute, San Diego, the
Beijing Open Laboratory for Cognitive Science, the Ludwig-MaximiliansUniversity, Munich, the University of São Paolo, Brazil, and the Sony
Computer Science Laboratory, Paris. In 2009, he was a Visiting Professor at the Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna, Pisa, and at Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, China, and was appointed as a “Fellow of the School of Engineering” at the University of Tokyo and in 2016 a “Fellow of ECLT,” the
European Center for Living Technology, Venice, Italy. In 2009, he started
the “ShanghAI Lectures” (at Shanghai Jiao Tong University), a global,
fully interactive videoconference-based series on natural and artificial
intelligence that now involve more than 50 universities from around the
planet. His book “How the Body Shapes the Way We Think – A New
View of Intelligence” (MIT Press, 2006) has been published in English,
Chinese, Japanese, Arabic, and French. He developed the humanoid
robot “Roboy,” which has attracted world-wide media attention, and he
is presently pursuing the “ROBOLOUNGE” project, where robots will
take care of the well-being of the customers, to be launched in an Asian
metropolis in 2017/2018.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Soongsil University. Downloaded on March 05,2026 at 11:54:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

